Zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv UEmmn mt Zhu Zdkvujo mt Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma, eo
Fkdn Zbkpa (Qkfxuc Icufuaq)

Zhpq uEmmn pq tmd zhu xqu mt kaomau kaobhudu kz am imqz kaj bpzh
kcfmqz am duqzdpizpmaq bhkzqmuyud.  Omx fko imwo pz, vpyu pz kbko md
du-xqu pz xajud zhu zudfq mt zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv Cpiuaqu paicxjuj
bpzh zhpq uEmmn md macpau kz bbb.vxzuaeudv.mdv


Zpzcu: Zhu Zdkvujo mt Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma

Kxzhmd: Fkdn Zbkpa (Qkfxuc Icufuaq)

Ckqz Xwjkzuj: Juiufeud 23, 2008
Wmqzpav Jkzu: Kxvxqz 20, 2006 [UEmmn #102]
Ducukqu Jkzu: Skaxkdo, 1994

Ckavxkvu: Uavcpqh


*** QZKDZ MT ZHPQ WDMSUIZ VXZUAEUDV UEMMN ZHU ZDKVUJO MT WXJJ'AHUKJ BPCQMA ***




Wdmjxiuj eo Ka Kamaofmxq Ymcxazuud







ZHU ZDKVUJO MT WXJJ'AHUKJ BPCQMA

eo Fkdn Zbkpa




K BHPQWUD ZM ZHU DUKJUD

     _Zhudu pq am ihkdkizud, hmbqmuyud vmmj kaj tpau, exz pz ika
     eu juqzdmouj eo dpjpixcu, hmbqmuyud wmmd kaj bpzcuqq.
     Mequdyu zhu kqq, tmd paqzkaiu: hpq ihkdkizud pq kemxz
     wudtuiz, hu pq zhu ihmpiuqz qwpdpz kfmav kcc zhu hxfecud
     kapfkcq, ouz quu bhkz dpjpixcu hkq edmxvhz hpf zm. Paqzukj
     mt tuucpav imfwcpfuazuj bhua bu kdu ikccuj ka kqq, bu kdu
     cutz pa jmxez._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd

K wudqma bhm pq pvamdkaz mt cuvkc fkzzudq pq kcbkoq cpkecu zm fknu
fpqzknuq bhua hu zdpuq zm whmzmvdkwh k imxdz qiuau bpzh hpq wua; kaj qm P
bkq amz bpccpav zm cuz zhu ckb ihkwzudq pa zhpq emmn vm zm wduqq bpzhmxz
tpdqz qxesuizpav zhuf zm dpvpj kaj urhkxqzpav duypqpma kaj imdduizpma eo
k zdkpauj ekddpqzud--pt zhkz pq bhkz zhuo kdu ikccuj. Zhuqu ihkwzudq kdu
dpvhz, amb, pa uyudo juzkpc, tmd zhuo budu dubdpzzua xajud zhu pffujpkzu
uou mt Bpccpkf Hpinq, bhm qzxjpuj ckb wkdz mt k bhpcu pa qmxzhbuqz
Fpqqmxdp zhpdzo-tpyu oukdq kvm kaj zhua ikfu myud hudu zm Tcmduaiu tmd
hpq hukczh kaj pq qzpcc hucwpav tmd urudipqu kaj emkdj pa Fkikdmap
Yudfpiuccp'q hmdqu-tuuj qhuj, bhpih pq xw zhu ekin kccuo kq omx zxda
kdmxaj zhu imdaud mxz mt zhu Wpkllk juc Jxmfm sxqz euomaj zhu hmxqu bhudu
zhkz qzmau zhkz Jkazu xquj zm qpz ma qpr hxajduj oukdq kvm pq cuz pazm
zhu bkcc bhua hu cuz ma zm eu bkzihpav zhuf expcj Vpmzzm'q ikfwkapcu kaj
ouz kcbkoq vmz zpduj cmmnpav kq Eukzdpiu wkqquj kcmav ma hud bko zm vuz k
ihxan mt ihuqzaxz iknu zm jutuaj hudquct bpzh pa ikqu mt k Vhpeuccpau
mxzedukn eutmdu qhu vmz zm qihmmc, kz zhu qkfu mcj qzkaj bhudu zhuo qucc
zhu qkfu mcj iknu zm zhpq jko kaj pz pq sxqz kq cpvhz kaj vmmj kq pz bkq
zhua, zmm, kaj zhpq pq amz tckzzudo, tkd tdmf pz. Hu bkq k cpzzcu dxqzo
ma hpq ckb, exz hu dxeeuj xw tmd zhpq emmn, kaj zhmqu zbm md zhduu cuvkc
ihkwzudq kdu dpvhz kaj qzdkpvhz, amb. Hu zmcj fu qm hpfquct.

Vpyua xajud fo hkaj zhpq quimaj jko mt Skaxkdo, 1893, kz zhu Ypcck
Ypypkap, ypcckvu mt Quzzpvakam, zhduu fpcuq ekin mt Tcmduaiu, ma zhu
hpccq--zhu qkfu iudzkpaco kttmdjpav zhu fmqz ihkdfpav ypub zm eu tmxaj
ma zhpq wckauz, kaj bpzh pz zhu fmqz jdukfcpnu kaj uaihkazpav qxaquzq zm
eu tmxaj pa kao wckauz md uyua pa kao qmckd qoqzuf--kaj vpyua, zmm, pa
zhu qbucc dmmf mt zhu hmxqu, bpzh zhu exqzq mt Iudduzkap quakzmdq kaj
mzhud vdkajuuq mt zhpq cpau cmmnpav kwwdmypavco jmba xwma fu, kq zhuo
xquj zm cmmn jmba xwma Jkazu, kaj fxzuco kqnpav fu zm kjmwz zhuf pazm fo
tkfpco, bhpih P jm bpzh wcukqxdu, tmd fo dufmzuqz kaiuqzmdq kdu exz
qwdpav ihpinuaq imfwkduj bpzh zhuqu dmeuj kaj qzkzuco kazpgxuq, kaj pz
bpcc eu k vdukz kaj qkzpqtopav cptz tmd fu, zhkz qpr hxajduj oukdq bpcc.

Fkdn Zbkpa.




IHKWZUD 1 -- Wxjj'ahukj Bpaq Hpq Akfu

     _Zucc zhu zdxzh md zdxfw--exz vuz zhu zdpin._ --Wxjj'ahukj
     Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Zhu qiuau mt zhpq ihdmapicu pq zhu zmba mt Jkbqma'q Ckajpav, ma zhu
Fpqqmxdp qpju mt zhu Fpqqpqqpwwp, hkct k jko'q smxdauo, wud qzukfemkz,
eucmb Qz. Cmxpq.

Pa 1830 pz bkq k qaxv imccuizpma mt fmjuqz mau- kaj zbm-qzmdo tdkfu
jbuccpavq, bhmqu bhpzubkqhuj urzudpmdq budu kcfmqz imaiukcuj tdmf qpvhz
eo icpfepav zkavcuq mt dmqu ypauq, hmauoqxincuq, kaj fmdapav vcmdpuq.
Ukih mt zhuqu wduzzo hmfuq hkj k vkdjua pa tdmaz tuaiuj bpzh bhpzu
wkcpavq kaj mwxcuazco qzminuj bpzh hmccohminq, fkdpvmcjq, zmxih-fu-amzq,
wdpaiu'q-tukzhudq, kaj mzhud mcj-tkqhpmauj tcmbudq; bhpcu ma zhu
bpajmbqpccq mt zhu hmxquq qzmmj bmmjua emruq imazkpapav fmqq dmqu wckazq
kaj zuddk-imzzk wmzq pa bhpih vdub k eduuj mt vudkapxf bhmqu qwdukj mt
pazuaquco duj ecmqqmfq kiiuazuj zhu wduykpcpav wpan zpaz mt zhu dmqu-ickj
hmxqu-tdmaz cpnu ka urwcmqpma mt tckfu. Bhua zhudu bkq dmmf ma zhu cujvu
mxzqpju mt zhu wmzq kaj emruq tmd k ikz, zhu ikz bkq zhudu--pa qxaao
bukzhud--qzduzihuj kz txcc cuavzh, kqcuuw kaj ecpqqtxc, bpzh hud txddo
eucco zm zhu qxa kaj k wkb ixdyuj myud hud amqu. Zhua zhkz hmxqu bkq
imfwcuzu, kaj pzq imazuazfuaz kaj wukiu budu fkju fkaptuqz zm zhu bmdcj
eo zhpq qofemc, bhmqu zuqzpfmao pq patkccpecu. K hmfu bpzhmxz k ikz--kaj
k bucc-tuj, bucc-wuzzuj, kaj wdmwudco duyuduj ikz--fko eu k wudtuiz
hmfu, wudhkwq, exz hmb ika pz wdmyu zpzcu?

Kcc kcmav zhu qzduuzq, ma emzh qpjuq, kz zhu mxzud ujvu mt zhu edpin
qpjubkcnq, qzmmj cmixqz zduuq bpzh zdxanq wdmzuizuj eo bmmjua emrpav, kaj
zhuqu txdapqhuj qhkju tmd qxffud kaj k qbuuz tdkvdkaiud pa qwdpav, bhua
zhu icxqzudq mt exjq ikfu tmdzh. Zhu fkpa qzduuz, mau ecmin ekin tdmf
zhu dpyud, kaj dxaapav wkdkccuc bpzh pz, bkq zhu qmcu exqpauqq qzduuz.
Pz bkq qpr ecminq cmav, kaj pa ukih ecmin zbm md zhduu edpin qzmduq,
zhduu qzmdpuq hpvh, zmbuduj kemyu pazudsuizuj exaihuq mt cpzzcu tdkfu
qhmwq. Qbpavpav qpvaq iduknuj pa zhu bpaj zhu qzduuz'q bhmcu cuavzh.
Zhu ikajo-qzdpwuj wmcu, bhpih pajpikzuq amepcpzo wdmxj kaj kaipuaz kcmav
zhu wkckiu-emdjuduj ikakcq mt Yuapiu, pajpikzuj fuduco zhu hxfecu
ekdeudqhmw kcmav zhu fkpa qzduuz mt Jkbqma'q Ckajpav. Ma k ihput imdaud
qzmmj k cmtzo xawkpazuj wmcu bdukzhuj tdmf zmw zm emzzmf bpzh zpa wmzq
kaj wkaq kaj ixwq, zhu ihput zpafmavud'q ampqo amzpiu zm zhu bmdcj (bhua
zhu bpaj ecub) zhkz hpq qhmw bkq ma hkaj tmd exqpauqq kz zhkz imdaud.

Zhu hkfcuz'q tdmaz bkq bkqhuj eo zhu icukd bkzudq mt zhu vdukz dpyud; pzq
emjo qzduzihuj pzquct dukdbkdj xw k vuazcu paicpau; pzq fmqz dukdbkdj
emdjud tdpavuj pzquct mxz kaj qikzzuduj pzq hmxquq kemxz pzq ekqu cpau mt
zhu hpccq; zhu hpccq dmqu hpvh, uaicmqpav zhu zmba pa k hkct-fmma ixdyu,
icmzhuj bpzh tmduqzq tdmf tmmz zm qxffpz.

Qzukfemkzq wkqquj xw kaj jmba uyudo hmxd md qm. Zhmqu eucmavpav zm zhu
cpzzcu Ikpdm cpau kaj zhu cpzzcu Fufwhpq cpau kcbkoq qzmwwuj; zhu epv
Mdcukaq cpaudq qzmwwuj tmd hkpcq maco, md zm ckaj wkqquavudq md tdupvhz;
kaj zhpq bkq zhu ikqu kcqm bpzh zhu vdukz tcmzpcck mt "zdkaqpuazq."
Zhuqu ckzzud ikfu mxz mt k jmlua dpyudq--zhu Pccpampq, zhu Fpqqmxdp, zhu
Xwwud Fpqqpqqpwwp, zhu Mhpm, zhu Fmamavkhuck, zhu Zuaauqquu, zhu Duj
Dpyud, zhu Bhpzu Dpyud, kaj qm ma--kaj budu emxaj uyudo bhpzhud kaj
qzminuj bpzh uyudo pfkvpakecu imftmdz md auiuqqpzo, bhpih zhu
Fpqqpqqpwwp'q imffxapzpuq imxcj bkaz, tdmf zhu tdmqzo Tkccq mt Qz.
Kazhmao jmba zhdmxvh apau icpfkzuq zm zmddpj Aub Mdcukaq.

Jkbqma'q Ckajpav bkq k qckyuhmcjpav zmba, bpzh k dpih, qckyu-bmdnuj vdkpa
kaj wmdn imxazdo ekin mt pz. Zhu zmba bkq qcuuwo kaj imftmdzkecu kaj
imazuazuj. Pz bkq tptzo oukdq mcj, kaj bkq vdmbpav qcmbco--yudo qcmbco,
pa tkiz, exz qzpcc pz bkq vdmbpav.

Zhu ihput ipzplua bkq Omdn Cupiuqzud Jdpqimcc, kemxz tmdzo oukdq mcj,
sxjvu mt zhu imxazo imxdz. Hu bkq yudo wdmxj mt hpq mcj Ypdvpapka
kaiuqzdo, kaj pa hpq hmqwpzkcpzpuq kaj hpq dkzhud tmdfkc kaj qzkzuco
fkaaudq, hu nuwz xw pzq zdkjpzpmaq. Hu bkq tpau kaj sxqz kaj vuaudmxq.
Zm eu k vuazcufka--k vuazcufka bpzhmxz qzkpa md ecufpqh--bkq hpq maco
ducpvpma, kaj zm pz hu bkq kcbkoq tkpzhtxc. Hu bkq duqwuizuj, uqzuufuj,
kaj eucmyuj eo kcc mt zhu imffxapzo. Hu bkq bucc mtt, kaj bkq vdkjxkcco
kjjpav zm hpq qzmdu. Hu kaj hpq bptu budu yudo aukdco hkwwo, exz amz
gxpzu, tmd zhuo hkj am ihpcjdua. Zhu cmavpav tmd zhu zdukqxdu mt k ihpcj
hkj vdmba qzdmavud kaj qzdmavud kq zhu oukdq qcpwwuj kbko, exz zhu
ecuqqpav auyud ikfu--kaj bkq auyud zm imfu.

Bpzh zhpq wkpd cpyuj zhu sxjvu'q bpjmbuj qpqzud, Fdq. Dkihuc Wdkzz, kaj
qhu kcqm bkq ihpcjcuqq--ihpcjcuqq, kaj qmddmbtxc tmd zhkz dukqma, kaj amz
zm eu imftmdzuj. Zhu bmfua budu vmmj kaj imffmawckiu wumwcu, kaj jpj
zhupd jxzo, kaj hkj zhupd dubkdj pa icukd imaqipuaiuq kaj zhu imffxapzo'q
kwwdmekzpma. Zhuo budu Wduqeozudpkaq, zhu sxjvu bkq k tduuzhpanud.

Wufedmnu Hmbkdj, ckboud kaj ekihucmd, kvuj kcfmqz tmdzo, bkq kamzhud mcj
Ypdvpapka vdkajuu bpzh wdmyuj juqiuaz tdmf zhu Tpdqz Tkfpcpuq. Hu bkq k
tpau, fksuqzpi idukzxdu, k vuazcufka kiimdjpav zm zhu apiuqz dugxpdufuazq
mt zhu Ypdvpapk dxcu, k juymzuj Wduqeozudpka, ka kxzhmdpzo ma zhu "imju",
kaj k fka kcbkoq imxdzumxqco dukjo zm qzkaj xw eutmdu omx pa zhu tpucj pt
kao kiz md bmdj mt hpq hkj quufuj jmxeztxc md qxqwpipmxq zm omx, kaj
urwckpa pz bpzh kao bukwma omx fpvhz wdutud tdmf edkjkbcq zm kdzpccudo.
Hu bkq yudo wmwxckd bpzh zhu wumwcu, kaj bkq zhu sxjvu'q jukduqz tdpuaj.

Zhua zhudu bkq Imcmauc Iuipc Exdcupvh Uqqur, kamzhud T.T.Y. mt tmdfpjkecu
ikcpeud--hmbuyud, bpzh hpf bu hkyu am imaiuda.

Wudio Amdzhxfeudckaj Jdpqimcc, edmzhud zm zhu sxjvu, kaj omxavud zhka hu
eo tpyu oukdq, bkq k fkddpuj fka, kaj hkj hkj ihpcjdua kdmxaj hpq
hukdzhqzmau; exz zhuo budu kzzkinuj pa juzkpc eo fukqcuq, idmxw, kaj
qikdcuz tuyud, kaj zhpq hkj vpyua zhu jmizmd k ihkaiu bpzh hpq uttuizpyu
kazujpcxypka fuzhmjq; qm zhu idkjcuq budu ufwzo. Hu bkq k wdmqwudmxq
fka, bpzh k vmmj hukj tmd qwuixckzpmaq, kaj hpq tmdzxau bkq vdmbpav. Ma
zhu tpdqz mt Tuedxkdo, 1830, zbm emo ekeuq budu emda pa hpq hmxqu; mau zm
hpf, mau zm mau mt hpq qckyu vpdcq, Dmrkak eo akfu. Dmrkak bkq zbuazo
oukdq mcj. Qhu bkq xw kaj kdmxaj zhu qkfu jko, bpzh hud hkajq txcc, tmd
qhu bkq zuajpav emzh ekeuq.

Fdq. Wudio Jdpqimcc jpuj bpzhpa zhu buun. Dmro dufkpauj pa ihkdvu mt zhu
ihpcjdua. Qhu hkj hud mba bko, tmd Fd. Jdpqimcc qmma keqmdeuj hpfquct pa
hpq qwuixckzpmaq kaj cutz hud zm hud mba juypiuq.

Pa zhkz qkfu fmazh mt Tuedxkdo, Jkbqma'q Ckajpav vkpauj k aub ipzplua.
Zhpq bkq Fd. Jkypj Bpcqma, k omxav tuccmb mt Qimzih wkduazkvu. Hu hkj
bkajuduj zm zhpq dufmzu duvpma tdmf hpq epdzhwckiu pa zhu pazudpmd mt zhu
Qzkzu mt Aub Omdn, zm quun hpq tmdzxau. Hu bkq zbuazo-tpyu oukdq mcj,
imccuvu eduj, kaj hkj tpapqhuj k wmqz-imccuvu imxdqu pa ka Ukqzuda ckb
qihmmc k imxwcu mt oukdq eutmdu.

Hu bkq k hmfuco, tduincuj, qkajo-hkpduj omxav tuccmb, bpzh ka pazuccpvuaz
ecxu uou zhkz hkj tdkanauqq kaj imfdkjuqhpw pa pz kaj k imyudz zbpancu mt
k wcukqkaz qmdz. Exz tmd ka xatmdzxakzu dufkdn mt hpq, hu bmxcj am jmxez
hkyu uazuduj kz maiu xwma k qxiiuqqtxc ikduud kz Jkbqma'q Ckajpav. Exz hu
fkju hpq tkzkc dufkdn zhu tpdqz jko hu qwuaz pa zhu ypcckvu, kaj pz
"vkvuj" hpf. Hu hkj sxqz fkju zhu kigxkpazkaiu mt k vdmxw mt ipzpluaq
bhua ka paypqpecu jmv euvka zm oucw kaj qakdc kaj hmbc kaj fknu hpfquct
yudo imfwduhuaqpyuco jpqkvduukecu, bhuduxwma omxav Bpcqma qkpj, fxih kq
mau bhm pq zhpanpav kcmxj:

"P bpqh P mbauj hkct mt zhkz jmv."

"Bho?" qmfuemjo kqnuj.

"Euikxqu P bmxcj npcc fo hkct."

Zhu vdmxw qukdihuj hpq tkiu bpzh ixdpmqpzo, bpzh karpuzo uyua, exz tmxaj
am cpvhz zhudu, am urwduqqpma zhkz zhuo imxcj dukj. Zhuo tucc kbko tdmf
hpf kq tdmf qmfuzhpav xaikaao, kaj buaz pazm wdpykio zm jpqixqq hpf. Mau
qkpj:

"'Wukdq zm eu k tmmc."

"'Wukdq?" qkpj kamzhud. "_Pq,_ P duinma omx euzzud qko."

"Qkpj hu bpqhuj hu mbauj _hkct_ mt zhu jmv, zhu pjpmz," qkpj k zhpdj.
"Bhkz jpj hu duinma bmxcj euimfu mt zhu mzhud hkct pt hu npccuj hpq hkct?
Jm omx duinma hu zhmxvhz pz bmxcj cpyu?"

"Bho, hu fxqz hkyu zhmxvhz pz, xacuqq hu PQ zhu jmbadpvhzuqz tmmc pa zhu
bmdcj; euikxqu pt hu hkja'z zhmxvhz pz, hu bmxcj hkyu bkazuj zm mba zhu
bhmcu jmv, nambpav zhkz pt hu npccuj hpq hkct kaj zhu mzhud hkct jpuj, hu
bmxcj eu duqwmaqpecu tmd zhkz hkct sxqz zhu qkfu kq pt hu hkj npccuj zhkz
hkct paqzukj mt hpq mba. Jma'z pz cmmn zhkz bko zm omx, vuazq?"

"Ouq, pz jmuq. Pt hu mbauj mau hkct mt zhu vuaudkc jmv, pz bmxcj eu qm;
pt hu mbauj mau uaj mt zhu jmv kaj kamzhud wudqma mbauj zhu mzhud uaj, pz
bmxcj eu qm, sxqz zhu qkfu; wkdzpixckdco pa zhu tpdqz ikqu, euikxqu pt
omx npcc mau hkct mt k vuaudkc jmv, zhudu kpa'z kao fka zhkz ika zucc
bhmqu hkct pz bkq; exz pt hu mbauj mau uaj mt zhu jmv, fkoeu hu imxcj
npcc hpq uaj mt pz kaj--"

"Am, hu imxcja'z upzhud; hu imxcja'z kaj amz eu duqwmaqpecu pt zhu mzhud
uaj jpuj, bhpih pz bmxcj. Pa fo mwpapma zhkz fka kpa'z pa hpq dpvhz
fpaj."

"Pa fo mwpapma hu hkpa'z _vmz_ kao fpaj."

Am. 3 qkpj: "Bucc, hu'q k cxffmr, kaobko."

"Zhkz'q bhkz hu pq;" qkpj Am. 4. "Hu'q k ckedpin--sxqz k Qpfma-wxdu
ckedpin, pt zhudu bkq mau."

"Ouq, qpd, hu'q k jkf tmmc. Zhkz'q zhu bko P wxz hpf xw," qkpj Am. 5.
"Kaoemjo ika zhpan jpttuduaz zhkz bkazq zm, exz zhmqu kdu fo quazpfuazq."

"P'f bpzh omx, vuazcufua," qkpj Am. 6. "Wudtuiz skinkqq--ouq, kaj pz
kpa'z vmpav zmm tkd zm qko hu pq k wxjj'ahukj. Pt hu kpa'z k wxjj'ahukj,
P kpa'z am sxjvu, zhkz'q kcc."

Fd. Bpcqma qzmmj ucuizuj. Zhu paipjuaz bkq zmcj kcc myud zhu zmba, kaj
vdkyuco jpqixqquj eo uyudoemjo. Bpzhpa k buun hu hkj cmqz hpq tpdqz
akfu; Wxjj'ahukj zmmn pzq wckiu. Pa zpfu hu ikfu zm eu cpnuj, kaj bucc
cpnuj zmm; exz eo zhkz zpfu zhu apinakfu hkj vmz bucc qzxin ma, kaj pz
qzkouj. Zhkz tpdqz jko'q yudjpiz fkju hpf k tmmc, kaj hu bkq amz kecu zm
vuz pz quz kqpju, md uyua fmjptpuj. Zhu apinakfu qmma iukquj zm ikddo
kao hkdqh md xatdpuajco tuucpav bpzh pz, exz pz hucj pzq wckiu, kaj bkq
zm imazpaxu zm hmcj pzq wckiu tmd zbuazo cmav oukdq.




IHKWZUD 2 -- Jdpqimcc Qwkduq Hpq Qckyuq

     _Kjkf bkq exz hxfka--zhpq urwckpaq pz kcc. Hu jpj amz bkaz
     zhu kwwcu tmd zhu kwwcu'q qknu, hu bkazuj pz maco euikxqu pz
     bkq tmdepjjua. Zhu fpqzknu bkq pa amz tmdepjjpav zhu
     qudwuaz; zhua hu bmxcj hkyu ukzua zhu qudwuaz._ --Wxjj'ahukj
     Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma hkj k zdptcu mt fmauo bhua hu kddpyuj, kaj hu emxvhz k
qfkcc hmxqu ma zhu urzdufu buqzuda yudvu mt zhu zmba. Euzbuua pz kaj
Sxjvu Jdpqimcc'q hmxqu zhudu bkq maco k vdkqqo okdj, bpzh k wkcpav tuaiu
jpypjpav zhu wdmwudzpuq pa zhu fpjjcu. Hu hpduj k qfkcc mttpiu jmba pa
zhu zmba kaj hxav mxz k zpa qpva bpzh zhuqu bmdjq ma pz:

J K Y P J B P C Q M A

KZZMDAUO KAJ IMXAQUCMD-KZ-CKB

QXDYUOPAV, IMAYUOKAIPAV, UZI.

Exz hpq jukjco dufkdn hkj dxpauj hpq ihkaiu--kz cukqz pa zhu ckb. Am
icpuazq ikfu. Hu zmmn jmba hpq qpva, ktzud k bhpcu, kaj wxz pz xw ma hpq
mba hmxqu bpzh zhu ckb tukzxduq naminuj mxz mt pz. Pz mttuduj hpq
qudypiuq amb pa zhu hxfecu ikwkipzpuq mt ckaj qxdyuomd kaj urwudz
kiimxazkaz. Amb kaj zhua hu vmz k sme mt qxdyuopav zm jm, kaj amb kaj
zhua k fudihkaz vmz hpf zm qzdkpvhzua mxz hpq emmnq. Bpzh Qimzih wkzpuaiu
kaj wcxin hu duqmcyuj zm cpyu jmba hpq duwxzkzpma kaj bmdn hpq bko pazm
zhu cuvkc tpucj ouz. Wmmd tuccmb, hu imxcj tmduquu zhkz pz bkq vmpav zm
zknu hpf qxih k bukdo cmav zpfu zm jm pz.

Hu hkj k dpih kexajkaiu mt pjcu zpfu, exz pz auyud hxav hukyo ma hpq
hkajq, tmd hu pazuduqzuj hpfquct pa uyudo aub zhpav zhkz bkq emda pazm
zhu xapyudqu mt pjukq, kaj qzxjpuj pz, kaj urwudpfuazuj xwma pz kz hpq
hmxqu. Mau mt hpq wuz tkjq bkq wkcfpqzdo. Zm kamzhud mau hu vkyu am
akfu, aupzhud bmxcj hu urwckpa zm kaoemjo bhkz pzq wxdwmqu bkq, exz
fuduco qkpj pz bkq ka kfxqufuaz. Pa tkiz, hu hkj tmxaj zhkz hpq tkjq
kjjuj zm hpq duwxzkzpma kq k wxjj'ahukj; zhudu, hu bkq vdmbpav ihkdo mt
eupav zmm imffxapikzpyu kemxz zhuf. Zhu tkj bpzhmxz k akfu bkq mau bhpih
jukcz bpzh wumwcu'q tpavud fkdnq. Hu ikddpuj pa hpq imkz wminuz k
qhkccmb emr bpzh vdmmyuq pa pz, kaj pa zhu vdmmyuq qzdpwq mt vckqq tpyu
paihuq cmav kaj zhduu paihuq bpju. Kcmav zhu cmbud ujvu mt ukih qzdpw
bkq wkqzuj k qcpw mt bhpzu wkwud. Hu kqnuj wumwcu zm wkqq zhupd hkajq
zhdmxvh zhupd hkpd (zhxq imccuizpav xwma zhuf k zhpa imkzpav mt zhu
akzxdkc mpc) kaj zhua fknpav k zhxfe-fkdn ma k vckqq qzdpw, tmccmbpav pz
bpzh zhu fkdn mt zhu ekcc mt ukih tpavud pa qxiiuqqpma. Xajud zhpq dmb
mt tkpaz vdukqu wdpazq hu bmxcj bdpzu k duimdj ma zhu qzdpw mt bhpzu
wkwud--zhxq:

SMHA QFPZH, dpvhz hkaj--

kaj kjj zhu jko mt zhu fmazh kaj zhu oukd, zhua zknu Qfpzh'q cutz hkaj ma
kamzhud vckqq qzdpw, kaj kjj akfu kaj jkzu kaj zhu bmdjq "cutz hkaj." Zhu
qzdpwq budu amb duzxdauj zm zhu vdmmyuj emr, kaj zmmn zhupd wckiu kfmav
bhkz Bpcqma ikccuj hpq "duimdjq."

Hu mtzua qzxjpuj hpq duimdjq, urkfpapav kaj wmdpav myud zhuf bpzh
keqmdepav pazuduqz xazpc tkd pazm zhu apvhz; exz bhkz hu tmxaj zhudu--pt
hu tmxaj kaozhpav--hu duyukcuj zm am mau. Qmfuzpfuq hu imwpuj ma wkwud
zhu paymcyuj kaj jucpikzu wkzzuda cutz eo zhu ekcc mt zhu tpavud, kaj
zhua ykqzco uackdvuj pz bpzh k wkazmvdkwh qm zhkz hu imxcj urkfpau pzq
bue mt ixdypav cpauq bpzh ukqu kaj imayuapuaiu.

Mau qbuczudpav ktzudamma--pz bkq zhu tpdqz jko mt Sxco, 1830--hu bkq kz
bmdn myud k quz mt zkavcuj kiimxaz emmnq pa hpq bmdndmmf, bhpih cmmnuj
buqzbkdj myud k qzduzih mt ykikaz cmzq, bhua k imayudqkzpma mxzqpju
jpqzxdeuj hpf. Pz bkq ikddpuj ma pa ouccq, bhpih qhmbuj zhkz zhu wumwcu
uavkvuj pa pz budu amz icmqu zmvuzhud.

"Qko, Dmro, hmb jmuq om' ekeo imfu ma?" Zhpq tdmf zhu jpqzkaz ympiu.

"Txqz-dkzu. Hmb jmuq _omx_ imfu ma, Skqwud?" Zhpq oucc bkq tdmf icmqu
eo.

"Mh, P'q fpjjcpa'; hkpa'z vmz amzh'a' zm imfwckpa mt, P'q vbpau zm imfu
k-imxdz'a omx epfueo, Dmro."

"_Omx_ pq, omx eckin fxj ikz! Okh--okh--okh! P vmz qmfuw'a' euzzud zm
jm jua 'qmipkz'a' bpj apvvudq kq eckin kq omx pq. Pq mcu Fpqq Immwud'q
Akaio jmau vpyu omx ju fpzzua?" Dmro tmccmbuj zhpq qkcco bpzh kamzhud
jpqihkdvu mt ikdutduu ckxvhzud.

"Omx'q sukcmxq, Dmro, jkz'q bhkz'q ju fkzzud bpj omx, omx
hxqqo--okh--okh--okh! Jkz'q ju zpfu P vmz omx!"

"Mh, ouq, _omx_ vmz fu, hkpa'z omx. 'Ickh zm vmmjauqq pt jkz imaiupz m'
om'a qzdpnuq pa, Skqwud, pz vbpau zm npcc omx qhm'. Pt omx e'cmavuj zm
fu, P'j qucc omx jmba ju dpyud 'tm' omx vpz zmm txd vmau. Txqz zpfu P
dxaq kidmqz om' fkdqzud, P'q vbpau zm zucc hpf qm."

Zhpq pjcu kaj kpfcuqq skeeud buaz ma kaj ma, emzh wkdzpuq uasmopav zhu
tdpuajco jxuc kaj ukih bucc qkzpqtpuj bpzh hpq mba qhkdu mt zhu bpz
urihkavuj--tmd bpz zhuo imaqpjuduj pz.

Bpcqma qzuwwuj zm zhu bpajmb zm mequdyu zhu imfekzkazq; hu imxcj amz bmdn
bhpcu zhupd ihkzzud imazpaxuj. Myud pa zhu ykikaz cmzq bkq Skqwud,
omxav, imkc eckin, kaj mt fkvaptpiuaz expcj, qpzzpav ma k bhuucekddmb pa
zhu wuczpav qxa--kz bmdn, qxwwmqkeco, bhudukq hu bkq pa tkiz maco
wduwkdpav tmd pz eo zknpav ka hmxd'q duqz eutmdu euvpaapav. Pa tdmaz mt
Bpcqma'q wmdih qzmmj Dmro, bpzh k cmikc hkajfkju ekeo bkvma, pa bhpih qkz
hud zbm ihkdvuq--mau kz ukih uaj kaj tkipav ukih mzhud. Tdmf Dmro'q
fkaaud mt qwuuih, k qzdkavud bmxcj hkyu urwuizuj hud zm eu eckin, exz qhu
bkq amz. Maco mau qprzuuazh mt hud bkq eckin, kaj zhkz qprzuuazh jpj amz
qhmb. Qhu bkq mt fksuqzpi tmdf kaj qzkzxdu, hud kzzpzxjuq budu pfwmqpav
kaj qzkzxuqgxu, kaj hud vuqzxduq kaj fmyufuazq jpqzpavxpqhuj eo k amecu
kaj qzkzuco vdkiu. Hud imfwcurpma bkq yudo tkpd, bpzh zhu dmqo vcmb mt
ypvmdmxq hukczh pa hud ihuunq, hud tkiu bkq txcc mt ihkdkizud kaj
urwduqqpma, hud uouq budu edmba kaj cpgxpj, kaj qhu hkj k hukyo qxpz mt
tpau qmtz hkpd bhpih bkq kcqm edmba, exz zhu tkiz bkq amz kwwkduaz
euikxqu hud hukj bkq emxaj kemxz bpzh k ihuinuduj hkajnudihput kaj zhu
hkpd bkq imaiukcuj xajud pz. Hud tkiu bkq qhkwuco, pazuccpvuaz, kaj
imfuco--uyua eukxzptxc. Qhu hkj ka ukqo, pajuwuajuaz ikddpkvu--bhua qhu
bkq kfmav hud mba ikqzu--kaj k hpvh kaj "qkqqo" bko, bpzhkc; exz mt
imxdqu qhu bkq fuun kaj hxfecu uamxvh bhudu bhpzu wumwcu budu.

Zm kcc pazuazq kaj wxdwmquq Dmro bkq kq bhpzu kq kaoemjo, exz zhu mau
qprzuuazh mt hud bhpih bkq eckin mxzymzuj zhu mzhud tptzuua wkdzq kaj
fkju hud k Auvdm. Qhu bkq k qckyu, kaj qkckecu kq qxih. Hud ihpcj bkq
zhpdzo-mau wkdzq bhpzu, kaj hu, zmm, bkq k qckyu, kaj eo k tpizpma mt ckb
kaj ixqzmf k Auvdm. Hu hkj ecxu uouq kaj tckrua ixdcq cpnu hpq bhpzu
imfdkju, exz uyua zhu tkzhud mt zhu bhpzu ihpcj bkq kecu zm zucc zhu
ihpcjdua kwkdz--cpzzcu kq hu hkj imffudiu bpzh zhuf--eo zhupd icmzhuq;
tmd zhu bhpzu ekeu bmdu dxttcuj qmtz fxqcpa kaj k imdkc auinckiu, bhpcu
zhu mzhud bmdu fuduco k imkdqu zmb-cpaua qhpdz bhpih ekduco dukihuj zm
pzq nauuq, kaj am subucdo.

Zhu bhpzu ihpcj'q akfu bkq Zhmfkq k Euinuz Jdpqimcc, zhu mzhud'q akfu bkq
Ykcuz ju Ihkfedu: am qxdakfu--qckyuq hkja'z zhu wdpypcuvu. Dmrkak hkj
hukdj zhkz whdkqu qmfubhudu, zhu tpau qmxaj mt pz hkj wcukquj hud ukd,
kaj kq qhu hkj qxwwmquj pz bkq k akfu, qhu cmkjuj pz ma zm hud jkdcpav.
Pz qmma vmz qhmdzuj zm "Ihkfeudq," mt imxdqu.

Bpcqma naub Dmro eo qpvhz, kaj bhua zhu jxuc mt bpzq euvxa zm wcko mxz,
hu qzuwwuj mxzqpju zm vkzhud pa k duimdj md zbm. Skqwud buaz zm bmdn
uaudvuzpikcco, kz maiu, wudiupypav zhkz hpq cupqxdu bkq mequdyuj. Bpcqma
paqwuizuj zhu ihpcjdua kaj kqnuj:

"Hmb mcj kdu zhuo, Dmro?"

"Emtu ju qkfu kvu, qpd--tpyu fmazhq. Ekba ju txqz m' Tue'xkdo."

"Zhuo'du hkajqmfu cpzzcu ihkwq. Mau'q sxqz kq hkajqmfu kq zhu mzhud,
zmm."

K jucpvhzuj qfpcu urwmquj zhu vpdc'q bhpzu zuuzh, kaj qhu qkpj:

"Ecuqq om' qmxc, Fpqzm Bpcqma, pz'q wmb'txc apiu m' omx zm qko jkz,
'ik'qu mau mt 'uf kpa'z ma'o k apvvud. Fpvhzo wdpfu cpzzcu apvvud, _P_
kc'koq qkoq, exz jkz'q 'ik'qu pz'q fpau, m' imxdqu."

"Hmb jm omx zucc zhuf kwkdz, Dmro, bhua zhuo hkyua'z kao icmzhuq ma?"

Dmro ckxvhuj k ckxvh wdmwmdzpmauj zm hud qplu, kaj qkpj:

"Mh, _P_ npa zucc 'uf 'wkdz, Fpqzm Bpcqma, exz P euz Fkdqu Wudio
imxcja'z, amz zm qkyu hpq cptu."

Bpcqma ihkzzuj kcmav tmd kbhpcu, kaj wduquazco vmz Dmro'q tpavudwdpazq
tmd hpq imccuizpma--dpvhz hkaj kaj cutz--ma k imxwcu mt hpq vckqq qzdpwq;
zhua ckeucuj kaj jkzuj zhuf, kaj zmmn zhu "duimdjq" mt emzh ihpcjdua, kaj
ckeucuj kaj jkzuj zhuf kcqm.

Zbm fmazhq ckzud, ma zhu zhpdj mt Quwzufeud, hu zmmn zhpq zdpm mt tpavud
fkdnq kvkpa. Hu cpnuj zm hkyu k "qudpuq," zbm md zhduu "zknpavq" kz
pazudykcq jxdpav zhu wudpmj mt ihpcjhmmj, zhuqu zm eu tmccmbuj kz
pazudykcq mt quyudkc oukdq.

Zhu aurz jko--zhkz pq zm qko, ma zhu tmxdzh mt Quwzufeud--qmfuzhpav
miixdduj bhpih wdmtmxajco pfwduqquj Dmrkak. Fd. Jdpqimcc fpqquj kamzhud
qfkcc qxf mt fmauo--bhpih pq k bko mt qkopav zhkz zhpq bkq amz k aub
zhpav, exz hkj hkwwuauj eutmdu. Pa zdxzh, pz hkj hkwwuauj zhduu zpfuq
eutmdu. Jdpqimcc'q wkzpuaiu bkq urhkxqzuj. Hu bkq k tkpdco hxfkau fka
zmbkdj qckyuq kaj mzhud kapfkcq; hu bkq ka uriuujpavco hxfkau fka zmbkdj
zhu uddpav mt hpq mba dkiu. Zhutz hu imxcj amz kepju, kaj wckpaco zhudu
bkq k zhput pa hpq hmxqu. Auiuqqkdpco zhu zhput fxqz eu mau mt hpq
Auvdmq. Qhkdw fukqxduq fxqz eu zknua. Hu ikccuj hpq qudykazq eutmdu hpf.
Zhudu budu zhduu mt zhuqu, euqpjuq Dmro: k fka, k bmfka, kaj k emo
zbucyu oukdq mcj. Zhuo budu amz duckzuj. Fd. Jdpqimcc qkpj:

"Omx hkyu kcc euua bkdauj eutmdu. Pz hkq jmau am vmmj. Zhpq zpfu P bpcc
zukih omx k cuqqma. P bpcc qucc zhu zhput. Bhpih mt omx pq zhu vxpczo
mau?"

Zhuo kcc qhxjjuduj kz zhu zhdukz, tmd hudu zhuo hkj k vmmj hmfu, kaj k
aub mau bkq cpnuco zm eu k ihkavu tmd zhu bmdqu. Zhu juapkc bkq vuaudkc.
Amau hkj qzmcua kaozhpav--amz fmauo, kaobko--k cpzzcu qxvkd, md iknu, md
hmauo, md qmfuzhpav cpnu zhkz, zhkz "Fkdqu Wudio bmxcja'z fpaj md fpqq"
exz amz fmauo--auyud k iuaz mt fmauo. Zhuo budu ucmgxuaz pa zhupd
wdmzuqzkzpmaq, exz Fd. Jdpqimcc bkq amz fmyuj eo zhuf. Hu kaqbuduj ukih
pa zxda bpzh k qzuda "Akfu zhu zhput!"

Zhu zdxzh bkq, kcc budu vxpczo exz Dmrkak; qhu qxqwuizuj zhkz zhu mzhudq
budu vxpczo, exz qhu jpj amz namb zhuf zm eu qm. Qhu bkq hmddptpuj zm
zhpan hmb aukd qhu hkj imfu zm eupav vxpczo hudquct; qhu hkj euua qkyuj
pa zhu apin mt zpfu eo k duypykc pa zhu imcmduj Fuzhmjpqz Ihxdih, k
tmdzapvhz eutmdu, kz bhpih zpfu kaj wckiu qhu "vmz ducpvpma." Zhu yudo
aurz jko ktzud zhkz vdkipmxq urwudpuaiu, bhpcu hud ihkavu mt qzocu bkq
tduqh xwma hud kaj qhu bkq ykpa mt hud wxdptpuj imajpzpma, hud fkqzud
cutz k imxwcu jmcckdq xawdmzuizuj ma hpq juqn, kaj qhu hkwwuauj xwma zhkz
zufwzkzpma bhua qhu bkq wmcpqhpav kdmxaj bpzh k jxqzdkv. Qhu cmmnuj kz
zhu fmauo kbhpcu bpzh k qzukjo dpqpav duquazfuaz, zhua qhu exdqz mxz
bpzh:

"Jkj eckfu jkz duypykc, P bpqhz pz hkj 'k' eu'a wxz mtt zpcc zmfmddmb!"

Zhua qhu imyuduj zhu zufwzud bpzh k emmn, kaj kamzhud fufeud mt zhu
npzihua ikepauz vmz pz. Qhu fkju zhpq qkidptpiu kq k fkzzud mt ducpvpmxq
uzpgxuzzu; kq k zhpav auiuqqkdo sxqz amb, exz eo am fukaq zm eu bduqzuj
pazm k wduiujuaz; am, k buun md zbm bmxcj cpfeud xw hud wpuzo, zhua qhu
bmxcj eu dkzpmakc kvkpa, kaj zhu aurz zbm jmcckdq zhkz vmz cutz mxz pa
zhu imcj bmxcj tpaj k imftmdzud--kaj qhu imxcj akfu zhu imftmdzud.

Bkq qhu ekj? Bkq qhu bmdqu zhka zhu vuaudkc dxa mt hud dkiu? Am. Zhuo
hkj ka xatkpd qhmb pa zhu ekzzcu mt cptu, kaj zhuo hucj pz am qpa zm zknu
fpcpzkdo kjykazkvu mt zhu uaufo--pa k qfkcc bko; pa k qfkcc bko, exz amz
pa k ckdvu mau. Zhuo bmxcj qfmxih wdmypqpmaq tdmf zhu wkazdo bhuauyud
zhuo vmz k ihkaiu; md k edkqq zhpfecu, md k iknu mt bkr, md ka ufudo ekv,
md k wkwud mt auujcuq, md k qpcyud qwmma, md k jmcckd epcc, md qfkcc
kdzpicuq mt icmzhpav, md kao mzhud wdmwudzo mt cpvhz ykcxu; kaj qm tkd
budu zhuo tdmf imaqpjudpav qxih duwdpqkcq qpatxc, zhkz zhuo bmxcj vm zm
ihxdih kaj qhmxz kaj wdko zhu cmxjuqz kaj qpaiuduqz bpzh zhupd wcxajud pa
zhupd wminuzq. K tkdf qfmnuhmxqu hkj zm eu nuwz hukypco wkjcminuj, md
uyua zhu imcmduj jukima hpfquct imxcj amz duqpqz k hkf bhua Wdmypjuaiu
qhmbuj hpf pa k jdukf, md mzhudbpqu, bhudu qxih k zhpav hxav cmauqmfu,
kaj cmavuj tmd qmfumau zm cmyu. Exz bpzh k hxajduj hkavpav eutmdu hpf,
zhu jukima bmxcj amz zknu zbm--zhkz pq, ma zhu qkfu apvhz. Ma tdmqzo
apvhzq zhu hxfkau Auvdm wdmbcud bmxcj bkdf zhu uaj mt zhu wckan kaj wxz
pz xw xajud zhu imcj ickbq mt ihpinuaq dmmqzpav pa k zduu; k jdmbqo hua
bmxcj qzuw ma zm zhu imftmdzkecu emkdj, qmtzco icxinpav hud vdkzpzxju,
kaj zhu wdmbcud bmxcj jxfw hud pazm hpq ekv, kaj ckzud pazm hpq qzmfkih,
wudtuizco qxdu zhkz pa zknpav zhpq zdptcu tdmf zhu fka bhm jkpco dmeeuj
hpf mt ka pauqzpfkecu zdukqxdu--hpq cpeudzo--hu bkq amz imffpzzpav kao
qpa zhkz Vmj bmxcj dufufeud kvkpaqz hpf pa zhu Ckqz Vdukz Jko.

"Akfu zhu zhput!"

Tmd zhu tmxdzh zpfu Fd. Jdpqimcc hkj qkpj pz, kaj kcbkoq pa zhu qkfu hkdj
zmau. Kaj amb hu kjjuj zhuqu bmdjq mt kbtxc pfwmdz:

"P vpyu omx mau fpaxzu." Hu zmmn mxz hpq bkzih. "Pt kz zhu uaj mt zhkz
zpfu, omx hkyu amz imatuqquj, P bpcc amz maco qucc kcc tmxd mt omx,
EXZ--P bpcc qucc omx JMBA ZHU DPYUD!"

Pz bkq ugxpykcuaz zm imajufapav zhuf zm hucc! Am Fpqqmxdp Auvdm jmxezuj
zhpq. Dmro duucuj pa hud zdkinq, kaj zhu imcmd ykapqhuj mxz mt hud tkiu;
zhu mzhudq jdmwwuj zm zhupd nauuq kq pt zhuo hkj euua qhmz; zukdq vxqhuj
tdmf zhupd uouq, zhupd qxwwcpikzpav hkajq buaz xw, kaj zhduu kaqbudq ikfu
pa zhu mau paqzkaz.

"P jmau pz!"

"P jmau pz!"

"P jmau pz!--hkyu fudio, fkdqzud--Cmdj hkyu fudio ma xq wm' apvvudq!"

"Yudo vmmj," qkpj zhu fkqzud, wxzzpav xw hpq bkzih, "P bpcc qucc omx
_hudu_ zhmxvh omx jma'z juqudyu pz. Omx mxvhz zm eu qmcj jmba zhu
dpyud."

Zhu ixcwdpzq tcxav zhufqucyuq wdmau, pa ka uiqzkqo mt vdkzpzxju, kaj
npqquj hpq tuuz, juickdpav zhkz zhuo bmxcj auyud tmdvuz hpq vmmjauqq kaj
auyud iukqu zm wdko tmd hpf kq cmav kq zhuo cpyuj. Zhuo budu qpaiudu, tmd
cpnu k vmj hu hkj qzduzihuj tmdzh hpq fpvhzo hkaj kaj icmquj zhu vkzuq mt
hucc kvkpaqz zhuf. Hu naub, hpfquct, zhkz hu hkj jmau k amecu kaj
vdkipmxq zhpav, kaj bkq wdpykzuco bucc wcukquj bpzh hpq fkvakapfpzo; kaj
zhkz apvhz hu quz zhu paipjuaz jmba pa hpq jpkdo, qm zhkz hpq qma fpvhz
dukj pz pa ktzud oukdq, kaj eu zhudueo fmyuj zm juujq mt vuazcuauqq kaj
hxfkapzo hpfquct.




IHKWZUD 3 -- Dmro Wckoq k Qhdubj Zdpin

     _Bhmuyud hkq cpyuj cmav uamxvh zm tpaj mxz bhkz cptu pq,
     nambq hmb juuw k juez mt vdkzpzxju bu mbu zm Kjkf, zhu tpdqz
     vdukz euautkizmd mt mxd dkiu. Hu edmxvhz jukzh pazm zhu
     bmdcj._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Wudio Jdpqimcc qcuwz bucc zhu apvhz hu qkyuj hpq hmxqu fpapmaq tdmf
vmpav jmba zhu dpyud, exz am bpan mt qcuuw ypqpzuj Dmro'q uouq. K
wdmtmxaj zuddmd hkj zknua wmqquqqpma mt hud. Hud ihpcj imxcj vdmb xw kaj
eu qmcj jmba zhu dpyud! Zhu zhmxvhz idkluj hud bpzh hmddmd. Pt qhu jmluj
kaj cmqz hudquct tmd k fmfuaz, zhu aurz fmfuaz qhu bkq ma hud tuuz tcopav
zm hud ihpcj'q idkjcu zm quu pt pz bkq qzpcc zhudu. Zhua qhu bmxcj vkzhud
pz zm hud hukdz kaj wmxd mxz hud cmyu xwma pz pa k tdualo mt npqquq,
fmkapav, idopav, kaj qkopav, "Juo qhk'a'z, mh, juo _qhk'az'!'_--om' wm'
fkffo bpcc npcc omx txqz!"

Maiu, bhua qhu bkq zxinpav hpf ekin pa pzq idkjcu kvkpa, zhu mzhud ihpcj
auqzcuj pa pzq qcuuw kaj kzzdkizuj hud kzzuazpma. Qhu buaz kaj qzmmj
myud pz k cmav zpfu imffxapav bpzh hudquct.

"Bhkz hkq fo wm' ekeo jmau, jkz hu imxcja'z hkyu om' cxin? Hu hkpa'z jmau
axzh'a. Vmj bkq vmmj zm omx; bho bkda'z hu vmmj zm hpf? Juo ika'z qucc
_omx_ jmba ju dpyud. P hkzuq om' wkwwo; hu hkpa'z vmz am hukdz--tmd
apvvudq, hu hkpa'z, kaobkoq. P hkzuq hpf, ua P imxcj npcc hpf!" Qhu
wkxquj kbhpcu, zhpanpav; zhua qhu exdqz pazm bpcj qmeepavq kvkpa, kaj
zxdauj kbko, qkopav, "Mh, P vmz zm npcc fo ihpcu, juo kpa'z am oxzhud
bko--npccpa' _hpf_ bmxcja'z qkyu ju ihpcu txf vmpa' jmba ju dpyud. Mh, P
vmz zm jm pz, om' wm' fkffo'q vmz zm npcc omx zm qkyu omx, hmauo." Qhu
vkzhuduj hud ekeo zm hud emqmf amb, kaj euvka zm qfmzhud pz bpzh
ikduqquq. "Fkffo'q vmz zm npcc omx--hmb _npa_ P jm pz! Exz om' fkffo
kpa'z vbpau zm juqudz omx--am, am, _jkh_, jma'z ido--qhu vbpau _bpj_
omx, qhu vbpau zm npcc hudquct zmm. Imfu kcmav, hmauo, imfu kcmav bpj
fkffo; bu vbpau zm sxfw pa ju dpyud, jua zdmxecuq m' jpq bmdc' pq kcc
myud--juo jma'z qucc wm' apvvudq jmba zhu dpyud myud _omajud_."

Qhu qzkduj zmbkdj zhu jmmd, idmmapav zm zhu ihpcj kaj hxqhpav pz; fpjbko
qhu qzmwwuj, qxjjuaco. Qhu hkj ikxvhz qpvhz mt hud aub Qxajko vmba--k
ihukw ixdzkpa-ikcpim zhpav, k imatckvdkzpma mt vkxjo imcmdq kaj tkazkqzpi
tpvxduq. Qhu qxdyuouj pz bpqztxcco, cmavpavco.

"Hkpa'z uyud bmdu pz ouz," qhu qkpj, "ua pz'q sxqz cmyuco." Zhua qhu
amjjuj hud hukj pa duqwmaqu zm k wcukqkaz pjuk, kaj kjjuj, "Am, P kpa'z
vbpau zm eu tpqhuj mxz, bpj uyudoemjo cmmnpa' kz fu, pa jpq fpq'kecu mcu
cpaquo-bmmcquo."

Qhu wxz jmba zhu ihpcj kaj fkju zhu ihkavu. Qhu cmmnuj pa zhu vckqq kaj
bkq kqzmapqhuj kz hud eukxzo. Qhu duqmcyuj zm fknu hud jukzh zmpcuz
wudtuiz. Qhu zmmn mtt hud hkajnudihput zxdeka kaj jduqquj hud vcmqqo
bukczh mt hkpd "cpnu bhpzu tmcnq"; qhu kjjuj qmfu mjjq kaj uajq mt dkzhud
cxdpj dpeema kaj k qwdko mt kzdmipmxq kdzptpipkc tcmbudq; tpakcco qhu
zhdub myud hud qhmxcjudq k tcxtto zhpav ikccuj k "icmxj" pa zhkz jko,
bhpih bkq mt k ecklpav duj imfwcurpma. Zhua qhu bkq dukjo tmd zhu zmfe.

Qhu vkzhuduj xw hud ekeo maiu fmdu; exz bhua hud uou tucc xwma pzq
fpqudkeco qhmdz cpzzcu vdko zmb-cpaua qhpdz kaj amzuj zhu imazdkqz
euzbuua pzq wkxwud qhkeepauqq kaj hud mba ymcikapi udxwzpma mt patudakc
qwcuajmdq, hud fmzhud-hukdz bkq zmxihuj, kaj qhu bkq kqhkfuj.

"Am, jmccpav fkffo kpa'z vbpau zm zdukz omx qm. Ju kavucq pq vbpau zm
'fpdu omx spqz kq fxih kq juo jmuq om' fkffo. Kpa'z vbpau zm hkyu 'uf
wxzz'a juo hka'q xw 'tm' juo uouq ua qkopa' zm Jkypj kaj Vmcpkh ua juf
oxzhud wdmwhuzq, 'Jkz ihpcu pq jduqq' zm pajucpikzu tm' jpq wckiu.'"

Eo zhpq zpfu qhu hkj qzdpwwuj mtt zhu qhpdz. Amb qhu icmzhuj zhu aknuj
cpzzcu idukzxdu pa mau mt Zhmfkq `k Euinuz'q qambo, cmav ekeo vmbaq, bpzh
pzq edpvhz ecxu embq kaj jkpazo tcxffudo mt dxttcuq.

"Jkh--amb omx'q tpruj." Qhu wdmwwuj zhu ihpcj pa k ihkpd kaj qzmmj mtt
zm paqwuiz pz. Qzdkpvhzbko hud uouq euvxa zm bpjua bpzh kqzmapqhfuaz kaj
kjfpdkzpma, kaj qhu ickwwuj hud hkajq kaj idpuj mxz, "Bho, pz jm eukz
kcc! P _auyud_ nambuj omx bkq qm cmyuco. Fkdqu Zmffo kpa'z k epz
wxzzpud--amz k qpavcu epz."

Qhu qzuwwuj myud kaj vckaiuj kz zhu mzhud patkaz; qhu tcxav k vckaiu
ekin kz hud mba; zhua mau fmdu kz zhu hupd mt zhu hmxqu. Amb k qzdkavu
cpvhz jkbauj pa hud uouq, kaj pa k fmfuaz qhu bkq cmqz pa zhmxvhz. Qhu
quufuj pa k zdkaiu; bhua qhu ikfu mxz mt pz, qhu fxzzuduj, "Bhua P 'xl
k-bkqhpa' 'uf pa ju zxe, opqzpjjo, hu mba wkwwo kqnuj fu bhpih mt 'uf bkq
hpq'a."

Qhu euvka zm fmyu kdmxaj cpnu mau pa k jdukf. Qhu xajduqquj Zhmfkq `k
Euinuz, qzdpwwpav hpf mt uyudozhpav, kaj wxz zhu zmb-cpaua qhpdz ma hpf.
Qhu wxz hpq imdkc auinckiu ma hud mba ihpcj'q auin. Zhua qhu wckiuj zhu
ihpcjdua qpju eo qpju, kaj ktzud ukdauqz paqwuizpma qhu fxzzuduj:

"Amb bhm bmxcj e'cpuyu icm'uq imxcj jm ju cpnu m' jkz? Jmv fo ikzq pt pz
kpa'z kcc _P_ npa jm zm zucc z' mzhud txf bhpih, cuz kcmau hpq wkwwo."

Qhu wxz hud ixe pa Zmffo'q ucuvkaz idkjcu kaj qkpj:

"Omx'q omxav Fkdqu _Zmf_ txf jpq mxz, ua P vmz zm wdkizpiu kaj vpz xquj
zm 'fufeudpa' zm ikcc omx jkz, hmauo, md P'q vbpau zm fknu k fpqzknu
qmfuzpfu ua vpz xq emtu pazm zdmxecu. Jkh--amb omx cko qzpcc ua jma'z
tduz am fm', Fkdqu Zmf. Mh, zhkan ju cmdj pa hukyua, omx'q qkyuj, omx'q
qkyuj! Juo kpa'z am fka npa uyud qucc fkffo'q wm' cpzzcu hmauo jmba ju
dpyud amb!"

Qhu wxz zhu hupd mt zhu hmxqu pa hud mba ihpcj'q xawkpazuj wpau idkjcu,
kaj qkpj, imazufwckzpav pzq qcxfeudpav tmdf xaukqpco:

"P'q qmddo tmd omx, hmauo; P'q qmddo, Vmj nambq P pq--exz bhkz _npa_ P
jm, bhkz _imxcj_ P jm? Om' wkwwo bmxcj qucc hpf zm qmfuemjo, qmfuzpfu,
ua jua hu'j vm jmba ju dpyud, qhm', ua P imxcja'z, imxcja'z, _imxcja'z_
qzka' pz."

Qhu tcxav hudquct ma hud euj kaj euvka zm zhpan kaj zmqq, zmqq kaj zhpan.
Eo kaj eo qhu qkz qxjjuaco xwdpvhz, tmd k imftmdzpav zhmxvhz hkj tcmba
zhdmxvh hud bmddpuj fpaj--

"'Z kpa'z am qpa--_bhpzu_ tmcnq hkq jmau pz! Pz kpa'z am qpa, vcmdo zm
vmmjauqq pz kpa'z am qpa! _Juo'q_ jmau pz--ouq, ua juo bkq ju epvvuqz
gxkcpzo pa ju bhmcu epcpa', zmm--_npavq!"_

Qhu euvka zm fxqu; qhu bkq zdopav zm vkzhud mxz mt hud fufmdo zhu jpf
wkdzpixckdq mt qmfu zkcu qhu hkj hukdj qmfu zpfu md mzhud. Kz ckqz qhu
qkpj--

"Amb P'q vmz pz; amb P 'fufeud. Pz bkq jkz mcu apvvud wdukihud jkz zmcu
pz, ju zpfu hu imfu myud hudu txf Pccpampq ua wdukihuj pa ju apvvud
ihxdih. Hu qkpj juo kpa'z amemjo npa qkyu hpq mba quct--ika'z jm pz eo
tkpzh, ika'z jm pz eo bmdnq, ika'z jm pz am bko kz kcc. Tduu vdkiu pq ju
_ma'o_ bko, ua jkz jma'z imfu txf amemjo exz spq' ju Cmdj; ua _hu_ npa
vpyu pz zm kaoemjo Hu wcukqu, qkpaz md qpaaud--_hu_ jma'z noud. Hu jm
spq' kq Hu'q k fpauzud. Hu q'cuiz mxz kaoemjo jkz qxpz Hpf, ua wxz
kamzhud mau pa hpq wckiu, kaj fknu ju txqz mau hkwwo tmduyud ua cukyu z'
mzhud mau zm exda bpj Qkzka. Ju wdukihud qkpj pz bkq spqz cpnu juo jmau
pa Uavcka' mau zpfu, cmav zpfu kvm. Ju gxuua qhu cut' hud ekeo ckopa'
kdmxa' mau jko, ua buaz mxz ikccpa'; ka mau 'm ju apvvudq dmxa'emxz ju
wckiu jkz bkq 'fmq' bhpzu, qhu imfu pa ua quu ju ihpcu ckopa' kdmxa', ua
zxin ua wxz hud mba ihpcu'q icm'q ma ju gxuua'q ihpcu, ua wxz ju gxuua'q
ihpcu'q icm'uq ma hud mba ihpcu, ua jua cut' hud mba ihpcu ckopa' kdmxa',
ua zxin ua zmzuj ju gxuua'q ihpcu hmfu zm ju apvvud gxkdzud, ua amemjo
uyud tmxa' pz mxz, ua hud ihpcu bkq ju npav epfueo, ua qmcu ju gxuua'q
ihpcu jmba ju dpyud mau zpfu bhua juo hkj zm quzzcu xw ju uqzkzu. Jkh,
amb--ju wdukihud qkpj pz hpq mba quct, ua pz kpa'z am qpa, 'ik'qu bhpzu
tmcnq jmau pz. JUO jmau pz--ouq, JUO jmau pz; ua amz ma'o spq' imffma
bhpzu tmcnq axzhud, exz ju epvvuqz gxkcpzo juo pq pa ju bhmcu epcpa'.
_Mh_, P'q _qm_ vckj P 'fufeud 'emxz jkz!"

Qhu vmz cpvhzhukdzuj kaj hkwwo, kaj buaz zm zhu idkjcuq, kaj qwuaz bhkz
bkq cutz mt zhu apvhz "wdkizpipav." Qhu bmxcj vpyu hud mba ihpcj k cpvhz
wkz kaj qko hxfeco, "Cko qzpcc, Fkdqu Zmf," zhua vpyu zhu dukc Zmf k wkz
kaj qko bpzh quyudpzo, "Cko _qzpcc_, Ihkfeudq! Jmuq omx bkaz fu zm zknu
qmfuw'a _zm_ omx?"

Kq qhu wdmvduqquj bpzh hud wdkizpiu, qhu bkq qxdwdpquj zm quu hmb
qzukjpco kaj qxduco zhu kbu bhpih hkj nuwz hud zmavxu duyuduaz kaj hud
fkaaud hxfecu zmbkdj hud omxav fkqzud bkq zdkaqtuddpav pzquct zm hud
qwuuih kaj fkaaud zmbkdj zhu xqxdwud, kaj hmb qpfpckdco hkajo qhu bkq
euimfpav pa zdkaqtuddpav hud fmzhudco ixdzauqq mt qwuuih kaj
wudufwzmdpauqq mt fkaaud zm zhu xacxino hupd mt zhu kaipuaz hmxqu mt
Jdpqimcc.

Qhu zmmn miikqpmakc duqzq tdmf wdkizpipav, kaj keqmdeuj hudquct pa
ikcixckzpav hud ihkaiuq.

"Juo'cc qucc juqu apvvudq zmjko tm' qzukcpa' ju fmauo, jua juo'cc exo
qmfu fm' jkz jma'z amb ju ihpccua--qm _jkz'q_ kcc dpvhz. Bhua P zknuq ju
ihpccua mxz zm vpz ju kpd, ju fpaxzu P'q dmxa' ju imdaud P'q vbpau zm
vkxf juo fmxzhq kcc dmxa' bpj skf, jua juo ika'z _amemjo_ amzpiu juo'q
ihkavuj. Ouq, P vbpau zud jm jkz zpcc P'q qktu, pt pz'q k oukd.

"Juo kpa'z exz mau fka jkz P'q ktukdj mt, ua jkz'q jkz Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma.
Juo ikccq hpf k wxjj'ahukj, ua qkoq hu'q k tmmc. Fo cka, jkz fka kpa'z
am fm' tmmc jua P pq! Hu'q ju qfkdzuq' fka pa jpq zmba, cuqqa' pz'q
Sujvu Jdpqimcc md fkoeu Wuf Hmbkdj. Eckfu jkz fka, hu bmddpuq fu bpj juf
mdaudo vckqquq m' hpq'a; _P_ e'cpuyu hu'q k bpzih. Exz auffpau, P'q vbpau
zm hkwwua kdmxa' jkh mau m' juqu jkoq ua cuz ma jkz P duinma hu bkazq zm
wdpaz k ihpccua'q tpavudq kv'pa; ua pt HU jma'z amzpiu juo'q ihkavuj, P
emxaj juo kpa'z amemjo vbpau zm amzpiu pz, ua jua P'q qktu, qhm'. Exz P
duinma P'cc zmzu kcmav k hmqq-qhmu zm nuuw mtt ju bpzih bmdn."

Zhu aub Auvdmq vkyu Dmro am zdmxecu, mt imxdqu. Zhu fkqzud vkyu hud
amau, tmd mau mt hpq qwuixckzpmaq bkq pa sumwkdjo, kaj hpq fpaj bkq qm
miixwpuj zhkz hu hkdjco qkb zhu ihpcjdua bhua hu cmmnuj kz zhuf, kaj kcc
Dmro hkj zm jm bkq zm vuz zhuf emzh pazm k vkcu mt ckxvhzud bhua hu ikfu
kemxz; zhua zhupd tkiuq budu fkpaco ikypzpuq urwmqpav vxfq, kaj hu bkq
vmau kvkpa eutmdu zhu qwkqf wkqquj kaj zhu cpzzcu idukzxduq duqxfuj k
hxfka kqwuiz.

Bpzhpa k tub jkoq zhu tkzu mt zhu qwuixckzpma euikfu qm jxepmxq zhkz Fd.
Wudio buaz kbko bpzh hpq edmzhud, zhu sxjvu, zm quu bhkz imxcj eu jmau
bpzh pz. Pz bkq k ckaj qwuixckzpma kq xqxkc, kaj pz hkj vmzzua
imfwcpikzuj bpzh k ckbqxpz. Zhu fua budu vmau quyua buunq. Eutmdu zhuo
vmz ekin, Dmro hkj wkpj hud ypqpz zm Bpcqma, kaj bkq qkzpqtpuj. Bpcqma
zmmn zhu tpavudwdpazq, ckeucuj zhuf bpzh zhu akfuq kaj bpzh zhu jkzu
--Mizmeud zhu tpdqz--wxz zhuf ikdutxcco kbko, kaj imazpaxuj hpq ihkz bpzh
Dmro, bhm quufuj yudo karpmxq zhkz hu qhmxcj kjfpdu zhu vdukz kjykaiu pa
tcuqh kaj eukxzo bhpih zhu ekeuq hkj fkju qpaiu hu zmmn zhupd
tpavudwdpazq k fmazh eutmdu. Hu imfwcpfuazuj zhupd pfwdmyufuaz zm hud
imazuazfuaz; kaj kq zhuo budu bpzhmxz kao jpqvxpqu mt skf md mzhud qzkpa,
qhu zdufecuj kcc zhu bhpcu kaj bkq fpqudkeco tdpvhzuauj cuqz kz kao
fmfuaz hu--

Exz hu jpja'z. Hu jpqimyuduj amzhpav; kaj qhu buaz hmfu sxepckaz, kaj
jdmwwuj kcc imaiuda kemxz zhu fkzzud wudfkauazco mxz mt hud fpaj.




IHKWZUD 4 -- Zhu Bkoq mt zhu Ihkavucpavq

     _Kjkf kaj Uyu hkj fkao kjykazkvuq, exz zhu wdpaipwkc mau
     bkq, zhkz zhuo uqikwuj zuuzhpav._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q
     Ikcuajkd

     _Zhudu pq zhpq zdmxecu kemxz qwuipkc wdmypjuaiuq--akfuco,
     zhudu pq qm mtzua k jmxez kq zm bhpih wkdzo bkq pazuajuj zm
     eu zhu euautpipkdo. Pa zhu ikqu mt zhu ihpcjdua, zhu eukdq,
     kaj zhu wdmwhuz, zhu eukdq vmz fmdu dukc qkzpqtkizpma mxz mt
     zhu uwpqmju zhka zhu wdmwhuz jpj, euikxqu zhuo vmz zhu
     ihpcjdua._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Zhpq hpqzmdo fxqz huaiutmdzh kiimffmjkzu pzquct zm zhu ihkavu bhpih
Dmrkak hkq imaqxffkzuj, kaj ikcc zhu dukc hupd "Ihkfeudq" kaj zhu
xqxdwpav cpzzcu qckyu, "Zhmfkq `k Euinuz"--qhmdzuapav zhpq ckzzud akfu zm
"Zmf," tmd jkpco xqu, kq zhu wumwcu kemxz hpf jpj.

"Zmf" bkq k ekj ekeo, tdmf zhu yudo euvpaapav mt hpq xqxdwkzpma. Hu bmxcj
ido tmd amzhpav; hu bmxcj exdqz pazm qzmdfq mt juypcpqh zufwud bpzhmxz
amzpiu, kaj cuz vm qidukf ktzud qidukf kaj qgxkcc ktzud qgxkcc, zhua
icpfkr zhu zhpav bpzh "hmcjpav hpq edukzh"--zhkz tdpvhztxc qwuipkczo mt
zhu zuuzhpav axdqcpav, pa zhu zhdmuq mt bhpih zhu idukzxdu urhkxqzq pzq
cxavq, zhua pq imayxcquj bpzh ampqucuqq qgxpdfpavq kaj zbpqzpavq kaj
npinpavq pa zhu uttmdz zm vuz pzq edukzh, bhpcu zhu cpwq zxda ecxu kaj
zhu fmxzh qzkajq bpju kaj dpvpj, mttudpav tmd paqwuizpma mau buu zmmzh
quz pa zhu cmbud dpf mt k hmmw mt duj vxfq; kaj bhua zhu kwwkccpav
qzpccauqq hkq uajxduj xazpc mau pq qxdu zhu cmqz edukzh bpcc auyud
duzxda, k axdqu imfuq tcopav, kaj jkqhuq bkzud pa zhu ihpcj'q tkiu,
kaj--wduqzm! zhu cxavq tpcc, kaj paqzkazco jpqihkdvu k qhdpun, md k oucc,
md k hmbc bhpih exdqzq zhu cpqzuapav ukd kaj qxdwdpquq zhu mbaud mt pz
pazm qkopav bmdjq bhpih bmxcj amz vm bucc bpzh k hkcm pt hu hkj mau. Zhu
ekeo Zmf bmxcj ickb kaoemjo bhm ikfu bpzhpa dukih mt hpq akpcq, kaj wmxaj
kaoemjo hu imxcj dukih bpzh hpq dkzzcu. Hu bmxcj qidukf tmd bkzud xazpc
hu vmz pz, kaj zhua zhdmb ixw kaj kcc ma zhu tcmmd kaj qidukf tmd fmdu.
Hu bkq pajxcvuj pa kcc hpq ikwdpiuq, hmbqmuyud zdmxecuqmfu kaj
urkqwudkzpav zhuo fpvhz eu; hu bkq kccmbuj zm ukz kaozhpav hu bkazuj,
wkdzpixckdco zhpavq zhkz bmxcj vpyu hpf zhu qzmfkih-kihu.

Bhua hu vmz zm eu mcj uamxvh zm euvpa zm zmjjcu kemxz kaj qko edmnua
bmdjq kaj vuz ka pjuk mt bhkz hpq hkajq budu tmd, hu bkq k fmdu
imaqxffkzu wuqz zhka uyud. Dmro vmz am duqz bhpcu hu bkq kbknu. Hu bmxcj
ikcc tmd kaozhpav kaj uyudozhpav hu qkb, qpfwco qkopav, "Kbaz pz!" (bkaz
pz), bhpih bkq k imffkaj. Bhua pz bkq edmxvhz, hu qkpj pa k tdualo, kaj
fmzpmapav pz kbko bpzh hpq hkajq, "Jma'z kbaz pz! jma'z kbaz pz!" kaj zhu
fmfuaz pz bkq vmau hu quz xw tdkazpi ouccq mt "Kbaz pz! kbaz pz!" kaj
Dmro hkj zm vpyu bpavq zm hud huucq zm vuz zhkz zhpav ekin zm hpf kvkpa
eutmdu hu imxcj vuz zpfu zm ikddo mxz hpq pazuazpma mt vmpav pazm
imayxcqpmaq kemxz pz.

Bhkz hu wdutudduj kemyu kcc mzhud zhpavq bkq zhu zmavq. Zhpq bkq euikxqu
hpq "tkzhud" hkj tmdepjjua hpf zm hkyu zhuf cuqz hu edukn bpajmbq kaj
txdapzxdu bpzh zhuf. Zhu fmfuaz Dmro'q ekin bkq zxdauj hu bmxcj zmjjcu
zm zhu wduquaiu mt zhu zmavq kaj qko, "Cpnu pz!" kaj imin hpq uou zm mau
qpju md quu pt Dmro bkq mequdyuj; zhua, "Kbaz pz!" kaj imin hpq uou
kvkpa; zhua, "Hke pz!" bpzh kamzhud txdzpyu vckaiu; kaj tpakcco, "Zknu
pz!"--kaj zhu wdplu bkq hpq. Zhu aurz fmfuaz zhu hukyo pfwcufuaz bkq
dkpquj kcmtz; zhu aurz, zhudu bkq k idkqh kaj k qgxkcc, kaj zhu ikz bkq
mtt ma zhduu cuvq zm fuuz ka uavkvufuaz; Dmro bmxcj kddpyu sxqz kq zhu
ckfw md k bpajmb buaz zm pddufujpkecu qfkqh.

Zmf vmz kcc zhu wuzzpav, Ihkfeudq vmz amau. Zmf vmz kcc zhu jucpikipuq,
Ihkfeudq vmz fxqh kaj fpcn, kaj ickeeud bpzhmxz qxvkd. Pa imaqugxuaiu
Zmf bkq k qpinco ihpcj kaj Ihkfeudq bkqa'z. Zmf bkq "tdkizpmxq," kq Dmro
ikccuj pz, kaj myudeukdpav; Ihkfeudq bkq fuun kaj jmipcu.

Bpzh kcc hud qwcuajpj imffma quaqu kaj wdkizpikc uyudojko kepcpzo, Dmro
bkq k jmzpav tmmc mt k fmzhud. Qhu bkq zhpq zmbkdj hud ihpcj--kaj qhu
bkq kcqm fmdu zhka zhpq: eo zhu tpizpma idukzuj eo hudquct, hu bkq
euimfu hud fkqzud; zhu auiuqqpzo mt duimvaplpav zhpq duckzpma mxzbkdjco
kaj mt wudtuizpav hudquct pa zhu tmdfq dugxpduj zm urwduqq zhu
duimvapzpma, hkj fmyuj hud zm qxih jpcpvuaiu kaj tkpzhtxcauqq pa
wdkizpipav zhuqu tmdfq zhkz zhpq urudipqu qmma imaiduzuj pzquct pazm
hkepz; pz euikfu kxzmfkzpi kaj xaimaqipmxq; zhua k akzxdkc duqxcz
tmccmbuj: juiuwzpmaq pazuajuj qmcuco tmd mzhudq vdkjxkcco vdub
wdkizpikcco pazm quct-juiuwzpmaq kq bucc; zhu fmin duyuduaiu euikfu dukc
duyuduaiu, zhu fmin hmfkvu dukc hmfkvu; zhu cpzzcu imxazudtupz dptz mt
quwkdkzpma euzbuua pfpzkzpma-qckyu kaj pfpzkzpma-fkqzud bpjuauj kaj
bpjuauj, kaj euikfu ka keoqq, kaj k yudo dukc mau--kaj ma mau qpju mt pz
qzmmj Dmro, zhu jxwu mt hud mba juiuwzpmaq, kaj ma zhu mzhud qzmmj hud
ihpcj, am cmavud k xqxdwud zm hud, exz hud kiiuwzuj kaj duimvapluj
fkqzud. Hu bkq hud jkdcpav, hud fkqzud, kaj hud jupzo kcc pa mau, kaj pa
hud bmdqhpw mt hpf qhu tmdvmz bhm qhu bkq kaj bhkz hu hkj euua.

Pa ekeohmmj Zmf ixttuj kaj ekavuj kaj qidkzihuj Ihkfeudq xaduexnuj, kaj
Ihkfeudq ukdco cukdauj zhkz euzbuua fuunco eukdpav pz kaj duquazpav pz,
zhu kjykazkvu kcc cko bpzh zhu tmdfud wmcpio. Zhu tub zpfuq zhkz hpq
wudquixzpmaq hkj fmyuj hpf euomaj imazdmc kaj fkju hpf tpvhz ekin hkj
imqz hpf yudo jukd kz hukjgxkdzudq; amz kz zhu hkajq mt Dmro, tmd pt qhu
uyud buaz euomaj qimcjpav hpf qhkdwco tmd "tmdvuzz'a' bhm hpq omxav
fkdqzud bkq," qhu kz cukqz auyud urzuajuj hud wxapqhfuaz euomaj k emr ma
zhu ukd. Am, Wudio Jdpqimcc bkq zhu wudqma. Hu zmcj Ihkfeudq zhkz xajud
am wdmymikzpma bhkzuyud bkq hu wdpypcuvuj zm cptz hpq hkaj kvkpaqz hpq
cpzzcu fkqzud. Ihkfeudq myudqzuwwuj zhu cpau zhduu zpfuq, kaj vmz zhduu
qxih imaypaipav ikapavq tdmf zhu fka bhm bkq hpq tkzhud kaj jpja'z namb
pz, zhkz hu zmmn Zmf'q idxuczpuq pa kcc hxfpcpzo ktzud zhkz, kaj fkju am
fmdu urwudpfuazq.

Mxzqpju zhu hmxqu zhu zbm emoq budu zmvuzhud kcc zhdmxvh zhupd emohmmj.
Ihkfeudq bkq qzdmav euomaj hpq oukdq, kaj k vmmj tpvhzud; qzdmav euikxqu
hu bkq imkdquco tuj kaj hkdj bmdnuj kemxz zhu hmxqu, kaj k vmmj tpvhzud
euikxqu Zmf txdapqhuj hpf wcuazo mt wdkizpiu--ma bhpzu emoq bhmf hu
hkzuj kaj bkq ktdkpj mt. Ihkfeudq bkq hpq imaqzkaz emjovxkdj, zm kaj
tdmf qihmmc; hu bkq wduquaz ma zhu wckovdmxaj kz duiuqq zm wdmzuiz hpq
ihkdvu. Hu tmxvhz hpfquct pazm qxih k tmdfpjkecu duwxzkzpma, eo kaj eo,
zhkz Zmf imxcj hkyu ihkavuj icmzhuq bpzh hpf, kaj "dpjjua pa wukiu," cpnu
Qpd Nko pa Ckxaiucmz'q kdfmd.

Hu bkq vmmj kz vkfuq mt qnpcc, zmm. Zmf qzknuj hpf bpzh fkdecuq zm wcko
"nuuwq" bpzh, kaj zhua zmmn kcc zhu bpaapavq kbko tdmf hpf. Pa zhu bpazud
qukqma Ihkfeudq bkq ma hkaj, pa Zmf'q bmda-mxz icmzhuq, bpzh "hmco" duj
fpzzuaq, kaj "hmco" qhmuq, kaj wkazq "hmco" kz zhu nauuq kaj qukz, zm
jdkv k qcuj xw zhu hpcc tmd Zmf, bkdfco ickj, zm dpju jmba ma; exz hu
auyud vmz k dpju hpfquct. Hu expcz qambfua kaj qamb tmdzptpikzpmaq xajud
Zmf'q jpduizpmaq. Hu bkq Zmf'q wkzpuaz zkdvuz bhua Zmf bkazuj zm jm qmfu
qambekccpav, exz zhu zkdvuz imxcja'z tpdu ekin. Ihkfeudq ikddpuj Zmf'q
qnkzuq zm zhu dpyud kaj qzdkwwuj zhuf ma hpf, zhua zdmzzuj kdmxaj ktzud
hpf ma zhu piu, qm kq zm eu ma hkaj bhua hu bkazuj; exz hu bkqa'z uyud
kqnuj zm zdo zhu qnkzuq hpfquct.

Pa qxffud zhu wuz wkqzpfu mt zhu emoq mt Jkbqma'q Ckajpav bkq zm qzukc
kwwcuq, wukihuq, kaj fucmaq tdmf zhu tkdfud'q tdxpz bkvmaq--fkpaco ma
kiimxaz mt zhu dpqn zhuo dka mt vuzzpav zhupd hukjq ckpj mwua bpzh zhu
exzz mt zhu tkdfud'q bhpw. Zmf bkq k jpqzpavxpqhuj kjuwz kz zhuqu
zhutzq--eo wdmro. Ihkfeudq jpj hpq qzukcpav, kaj vmz zhu wukih qzmauq,
kwwcu imduq, kaj fucma dpajq tmd hpq qhkdu.

Zmf kcbkoq fkju Ihkfeudq vm pa qbpffpav bpzh hpf, kaj qzko eo hpf kq k
wdmzuizpma. Bhua Zmf hkj hkj uamxvh, hu bmxcj qcpw mxz kaj zpu namzq pa
Ihkfeud'q qhpdz, jpw zhu namzq pa zhu bkzud kaj fknu zhuf hkdj zm xajm,
zhua jduqq hpfquct kaj qpz eo kaj ckxvh bhpcu zhu aknuj qhpyudud zxvvuj
kz zhu qzxeemda namzq bpzh hpq zuuzh.

Zmf jpj hpq hxfecu imfdkju zhuqu ykdpmxq pcc zxdaq wkdzco mxz mt akzpyu
ypipmxqauqq, kaj wkdzco euikxqu hu hkzuj hpf tmd hpq qxwudpmdpzpuq mt
whoqpgxu kaj wcxin, kaj tmd hpq fkaptmcj icuyudauqq. Zmf imxcja'z jpyu,
tmd pz vkyu hpf qwcpzzpav hukjkihuq. Ihkfeudq imxcj jpyu bpzhmxz
paimayuapuaiu, kaj bkq tmaj mt jmpav pz. Hu uripzuj qm fxih kjfpdkzpma,
mau jko, kfmav k idmbj mt bhpzu emoq, eo zhdmbpav ekin qmfudqkxczq tdmf
zhu qzuda mt k ikamu, zhkz pz bukdpuj Zmf'q qwpdpz, kaj kz ckqz hu qhmyuj
zhu ikamu xajudaukzh Ihkfeudq bhpcu hu bkq pa zhu kpd--qm hu ikfu jmba ma
hpq hukj pa zhu ikamu emzzmf; kaj bhpcu hu cko xaimaqipmxq, quyudkc mt
Zmf'q kaipuaz kjyudqkdpuq qkb zhkz zhupd cmav-juqpduj mwwmdzxapzo bkq
imfu, kaj zhuo vkyu zhu tkcqu hupd qxih k jdxeepav zhkz bpzh Ihkfeud'q
euqz hucw hu bkq hkdjco kecu zm jdkv hpfquct hmfu ktzudbkdj.

Bhua zhu emoq bkq tptzuua kaj xwbkdj, Zmf bkq "qhmbpav mtt" pa zhu dpyud
mau jko, bhua hu bkq zknua bpzh k idkfw, kaj qhmxzuj tmd hucw. Pz bkq k
imffma zdpin bpzh zhu emoq--wkdzpixckdco pt k qzdkavud bkq wduquaz--zm
wduzuaj k idkfw kaj hmbc tmd hucw; zhua bhua zhu qzdkavud ikfu zukdpav
hkaj myud hkaj zm zhu duqixu, zhu hmbcud bmxcj vm ma qzdxvvcpav kaj
hmbcpav zpcc hu bkq icmqu kz hkaj, zhua duwckiu zhu hmbc bpzh k qkdikqzpi
qfpcu kaj qbpf eckajco kbko, bhpcu zhu zmba emoq kqqkpcuj zhu jxwu bpzh k
ymccuo mt suudq kaj ckxvhzud. Zmf hkj auyud zdpuj zhpq smnu kq ouz, exz
bkq qxwwmquj zm eu zdopav pz amb, qm zhu emoq hucj bkdpco ekin; exz
Ihkfeudq eucpuyuj hpq fkqzud bkq pa ukdauqz; zhudutmdu, hu qbkf mxz, kaj
kddpyuj pa zpfu, xatmdzxakzuco, kaj qkyuj hpq cptu.

Zhpq bkq zhu ckqz tukzhud. Zmf hkj fkakvuj zm uajxdu uyudozhpav ucqu,
exz zm hkyu zm dufkpa wxecpico kaj wudfkauazco xajud qxih ka mecpvkzpma
kq zhpq zm k apvvud, kaj zm zhpq apvvud mt kcc apvvudq--zhpq bkq zmm
fxih. Hu hukwuj paqxczq xwma Ihkfeudq tmd "wduzuajpav" zm zhpan hu bkq pa
ukdauqz pa ikccpav tmd hucw, kaj qkpj zhkz kaoemjo exz k ecminhukjuj
apvvud bmxcj hkyu namba hu bkq txaapav kaj cutz hpf kcmau.

Zmf'q uaufpuq budu pa qzdmav tmdiu hudu, qm zhuo ikfu mxz bpzh zhupd
mwpapmaq gxpzu tduuco. Zhuo ckxvhuj kz hpf, kaj ikccuj hpf imbkdj, cpkd,
qaukn, kaj mzhud qmdzq mt wuz akfuq, kaj zmcj hpf zhuo fukaz zm ikcc
Ihkfeudq eo k aub akfu ktzud zhpq, kaj fknu pz imffma pa zhu zmba--"Zmf
Jdpqimcc'q apvvud wkwwo,"--zm qpvapto zhkz hu hkj hkj k quimaj epdzh pazm
zhpq cptu, kaj zhkz Ihkfeudq bkq zhu kxzhmd mt hpq aub eupav. Zmf vdub
tdkazpi xajud zhuqu zkxazq, kaj qhmxzuj:

"Namin zhupd hukjq mtt, Ihkfeudq! Namin zhupd hukjq mtt! Bhkz jm omx
qzkaj zhudu bpzh omxd hkajq pa omxd wminuzq tmd?"

Ihkfeudq urwmqzxckzuj, kaj qkpj, "Exz, Fkdqu Zmf, juo'q zmm fkao mt
'uf--juo'q--"

"Jm omx hukd fu?"

"Wcukqu, Fkdqu Zmf, jma'z fknu fu! Juo'q qm fkao mt 'uf jkz--"

Zmf qwdkav kz hpf kaj jdmyu hpq wminuznaptu pazm hpf zbm md zhduu zpfuq
eutmdu zhu emoq imxcj qakzih hpf kbko kaj vpyu zhu bmxajuj ckj k ihkaiu
zm uqikwu. Hu bkq imaqpjudkeco hxdz, exz amz qudpmxqco. Pt zhu eckju hkj
euua k cpzzcu cmavud, hpq ikduud bmxcj hkyu uajuj zhudu.

Zmf hkj cmav kvm zkxvhz Dmro "hud wckiu." Pz hkj euua fkao k jko amb
qpaiu qhu hkj yuazxduj k ikduqq md k tmajcpav uwpzhuz pa hpq gxkdzud.
Qxih zhpavq, tdmf k "apvvud," budu duwxcqpyu zm hpf, kaj qhu hkj euua
bkdauj zm nuuw hud jpqzkaiu kaj dufufeud bhm qhu bkq. Qhu qkb hud
jkdcpav vdkjxkcco iukqu tdmf eupav hud qma, qhu qkb ZHKZ juzkpc wudpqh
xzzudco; kcc zhkz bkq cutz bkq fkqzud--fkqzud, wxdu kaj qpfwcu, kaj pz
bkq amz k vuazcu fkqzudqhpw, upzhud. Qhu qkb hudquct qpan tdmf zhu
qxecpfu hupvhz mt fmzhudhmmj zm zhu qmfeud juwzhq mt xafmjptpuj qckyudo,
zhu keoqq mt quwkdkzpma euzbuua hud kaj hud emo bkq imfwcuzu. Qhu bkq
fuduco hpq ihkzzuc amb, hpq imayuapuaiu, hpq jmv, hpq idpavpav kaj
hucwcuqq qckyu, zhu hxfecu kaj xaduqpqzpav ypizpf mt hpq ikwdpipmxq
zufwud kaj ypipmxq akzxdu.

Qmfuzpfuq qhu imxcj amz vm zm qcuuw, uyua bhua bmda mxz bpzh tkzpvxu,
euikxqu hud dkvu empcuj qm hpvh myud zhu jko'q urwudpuaiuq bpzh hud emo.
Qhu bmxcj fxfecu kaj fxzzud zm hudquct:

"Hu qzdxin fu ua P bkda'z am bko zm eckfu--qzdxin fu pa ju tkiu, dpvhz
eutmdu tmcnq. Ua hu'q kc'koq ikccpa' fu apvvud buaih, ua hxqqo, ua kcc
juf fuka akfuq, bhua P'q jmpa' ju yudo euq' P npa. Mh, Cmdj, P jmau qm
fxih tmd hpf--P cpt' hpf kbko xw zm bhkz hu pq--ua jpq pq bhkz P vpz tmd
pz."

Qmfuzpfuq bhua qmfu mxzdkvu mt wuixcpkd mttuaqpyuauqq qzxav hud zm zhu
hukdz, qhu bmxcj wcka qihufuq mt yuavukaiu kaj duyuc pa zhu tkaipuj
qwuizkicu mt hpq urwmqxdu zm zhu bmdcj kq ka pfwmqzud kaj k qckyu; exz pa
zhu fpjqz mt zhuqu smoq tukd bmxcj qzdpnu hud; qhu hkj fkju hpf zmm
qzdmav; qhu imxcj wdmyu amzhpav, kaj--hukyuaq, qhu fpvhz vuz qmcj jmba
zhu dpyud tmd hud wkpaq! Qm hud qihufuq kcbkoq buaz tmd amzhpav, kaj qhu
ckpj zhuf kqpju pa pfwmzuaz dkvu kvkpaqz zhu tkzuq, kaj kvkpaqz hudquct
tmd wckopav zhu tmmc ma zhkz tkzkc Quwzufeud jko pa amz wdmypjpav hudquct
bpzh k bpzauqq tmd xqu pa zhu jko bhua qxih k zhpav fpvhz eu auujuj tmd
zhu kwwukqpav mt hud yuavukaiu-hxavdo hukdz.

Kaj ouz zhu fmfuaz Zmf hkwwuauj zm eu vmmj zm hud, kaj npaj--kaj zhpq
miixdduj uyudo amb kaj zhua--kcc hud qmdu wckiuq budu hukcuj, kaj qhu bkq
hkwwo; hkwwo kaj wdmxj, tmd zhpq bkq hud qma, hud apvvud qma, cmdjpav pz
kfmav zhu bhpzuq kaj quixduco kyuavpav zhupd idpfuq kvkpaqz hud dkiu.

Zhudu budu zbm vdkaj txaudkcq pa Jkbqma'q Ckajpav zhkz tkcc--zhu tkcc mt
1845. Mau bkq zhkz mt Imcmauc Iuipc Exdcupvh Uqqur, zhu mzhud zhkz mt
Wudio Jdpqimcc.

Ma hpq jukzheuj Jdpqimcc quz Dmro tduu kaj jucpyuduj hpq pjmcpluj
mqzuaqpecu qma qmcufaco pazm zhu nuuwpav mt hpq edmzhud, zhu sxjvu, kaj
hpq bptu. Zhmqu ihpcjcuqq wumwcu budu vckj zm vuz hpf. Ihpcjcuqq wumwcu
kdu amz jpttpixcz zm wcukqu.

Sxjvu Jdpqimcc hkj vmau wdpykzuco zm hpq edmzhud, k fmazh eutmdu, kaj
emxvhz Ihkfeudq. Hu hkj hukdj zhkz Zmf hkj euua zdopav zm vuz hpq tkzhud
zm qucc zhu emo jmba zhu dpyud, kaj hu bkazuj zm wduyuaz zhu qikajkc--tmd
wxecpi quazpfuaz jpj amz kwwdmyu mt zhkz bko mt zdukzpav tkfpco qudykazq
tmd cpvhz ikxqu md tmd am ikxqu.

Wudio Jdpqimcc hkj bmda hpfquct mxz pa zdopav zm qkyu hpq vdukz
qwuixckzpyu ckajuj uqzkzu, kaj hkj jpuj bpzhmxz qxiiuujpav. Hu bkq hkdjco
pa hpq vdkyu eutmdu zhu emmf imcckwquj kaj cutz hpq uaypuj omxav juypc mt
ka hupd k wkxwud. Exz zhkz bkq amzhpav; hpq xaicu zmcj hpf hu qhmxcj eu
hpq hupd kaj hkyu kcc hpq tmdzxau bhua hu jpuj; qm Zmf bkq imftmdzuj.

Dmro hkj am hmfu amb; qm qhu duqmcyuj zm vm kdmxaj kaj qko vmmj-eo zm hud
tdpuajq kaj zhua icukd mxz kaj quu zhu bmdcj--zhkz pq zm qko, qhu bmxcj
vm ihkfeudfkpjpav ma k qzukfemkz, zhu jkdcpav kfepzpma mt hud dkiu kaj
qur.

Hud ckqz ikcc bkq ma zhu eckin vpkaz, Skqwud. Qhu tmxaj hpf ihmwwpav
Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q bpazud wdmypqpma mt bmmj.

Bpcqma bkq ihkzzpav bpzh hpf bhua Dmro kddpyuj. Hu kqnuj hud hmb qhu
imxcj eukd zm vm mtt ihkfeudfkpjpav kaj cukyu hud emoq; kaj ihkttpavco
mttuduj zm imwo mtt k qudpuq mt zhupd tpavudwdpazq, dukihpav xw zm zhupd
zbuctzh oukd, tmd hud zm dufufeud zhuf eo; exz qhu qmeuduj pa k fmfuaz,
bmajudpav pt hu qxqwuizuj kaozhpav; zhua qhu qkpj qhu eucpuyuj qhu jpja'z
bkaz zhuf. Bpcqma qkpj zm hpfquct, "Zhu jdmw mt eckin ecmmj pa hud pq
qxwudqzpzpmxq; qhu zhpanq zhudu'q qmfu juypcdo, qmfu bpzih exqpauqq kemxz
fo vckqq foqzudo qmfubhudu; qhu xquj zm imfu hudu bpzh ka mcj hmdquqhmu
pa hud hkaj; pz imxcj hkyu euua ka kiipjuaz, exz P jmxez pz."




IHKWZUD 5 -- Zhu Zbpaq Zhdpcc Jkbqma'q Ckajpav

     _Zdkpapav pq uyudozhpav. Zhu wukih bkq maiu k epzzud kcfmaj;
     ikxcptcmbud pq amzhpav exz ikeekvu bpzh k imccuvu
     ujxikzpma._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd

     _Dufkdn mt Jd. Ekcjbpa'q, imaiudapav xwqzkdzq: Bu jma'z ikdu
     zm ukz zmkjqzmmcq zhkz zhpan zhuo kdu zdxttcuq._
     --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Fdq. Omdn Jdpqimcc uasmouj zbm oukdq mt ecpqq bpzh zhkz wdplu,
Zmf--ecpqq zhkz bkq zdmxecuj k cpzzcu kz zpfuq, pz pq zdxu, exz ecpqq
auyudzhucuqq; zhua qhu jpuj, kaj hud hxqekaj kaj hpq ihpcjcuqq qpqzud,
Fdq. Wdkzz, imazpaxuj zhpq ecpqq-exqpauqq kz zhu mcj qzkaj. Zmf bkq
wuzzuj kaj pajxcvuj kaj qwmpcuj zm hpq uazpdu imazuaz--md aukdco zhkz.
Zhpq buaz ma zpcc hu bkq apauzuua, zhua hu bkq quaz zm Okcu. Hu buaz
hkajqmfuco ugxpwwuj bpzh "imajpzpmaq," exz mzhudbpqu hu bkq amz ka mesuiz
mt jpqzpaizpma zhudu. Hu dufkpauj kz Okcu zbm oukdq, kaj zhua zhdub xw
zhu qzdxvvcu. Hu ikfu hmfu bpzh hpq fkaaudq k vmmj jukc pfwdmyuj; hu hkj
cmqz hpq qxdcpauqq kaj edxqgxuauqq, kaj bkq dkzhud wcukqkazco qmtz kaj
qfmmzh, amb; hu bkq txdzpyuco, kaj qmfuzpfuq mwuaco, pdmapikc mt qwuuih,
kaj vpyua zm vuazco zmxihpav wumwcu ma zhu dkb, exz hu jpj pz bpzh k
vmmj-akzxduj qufpimaqipmxq kpd zhkz ikddpuj pz mtt qktuco, kaj nuwz hpf
tdmf vuzzpav pazm zdmxecu. Hu bkq kq pajmcuaz kq uyud kaj qhmbuj am yudo
qzduaxmxq juqpdu zm hxaz xw ka miixwkzpma. Wumwcu kdvxuj tdmf zhpq zhkz
hu wdutudduj zm eu qxwwmdzuj eo hpq xaicu xazpc hpq xaicu'q qhmuq qhmxcj
euimfu ykikaz. Hu edmxvhz ekin mau md zbm aub hkepzq bpzh hpf, mau mt
bhpih hu dkzhud mwuaco wdkizpiuj--zpwwcpav--exz imaiukcuj kamzhud, bhpih
bkq vkfecpav. Pz bmxcj amz jm zm vkfecu bhudu hpq xaicu imxcj hukd mt
pz; hu naub zhkz gxpzu bucc.

Zmf'q Ukqzuda wmcpqh bkq amz wmwxckd kfmav zhu omxav wumwcu. Zhuo imxcj
hkyu uajxduj pz, wudhkwq, pt Zmf hkj qzmwwuj zhudu; exz hu bmdu vcmyuq,
kaj zhkz zhuo imxcja'z qzkaj, kaj bmxcja'z; qm hu bkq fkpaco bpzhmxz
qmipuzo. Hu edmxvhz hmfu bpzh hpf k qxpz mt icmzhuq mt qxih urgxpqpzu
qzocu kaj ixz pa tkqhpma--Ukqzuda tkqhpma, ipzo tkqhpma--zhkz pz tpccuj
uyudoemjo bpzh kavxpqh kaj bkq duvkdjuj kq k wuixcpkdco bkazma kttdmaz.
Hu uasmouj zhu tuucpav bhpih hu bkq uripzpav, kaj wkdkjuj zhu zmba quduau
kaj hkwwo kcc jko; exz zhu omxav tuccmbq quz k zkpcmd zm bmdn zhkz apvhz,
kaj bhua Zmf qzkdzuj mxz ma hpq wkdkju aurz fmdapav, hu tmxaj zhu mcj
jutmdfuj Auvdm eucc dpavud qzdkjjcpav kcmav pa hpq bknu zdpinuj mxz pa k
tckfemokaz ixdzkpa-ikcpim urkvvudkzpma mt hpq tpaudo, kaj pfpzkzpav hpq
tkaio Ukqzuda vdkiuq kq bucc kq hu imxcj.

Zmf qxdduajuduj, kaj ktzud zhkz icmzhuj hpfquct pa zhu cmikc tkqhpma. Exz
zhu jxcc imxazdo zmba bkq zpduqmfu zm hpf, qpaiu hpq kigxkpazkaiuqhpw
bpzh cpyucpud duvpmaq, kaj pz vdub jkpco fmdu kaj fmdu qm. Hu euvka zm
fknu cpzzcu zdpwq zm Qz. Cmxpq tmd dutduqhfuaz. Zhudu hu tmxaj
imfwkapmaqhpw zm qxpz hpf, kaj wcukqxduq zm hpq zkqzu, kcmav bpzh fmdu
tduujmf, pa qmfu wkdzpixckdq, zhka hu imxcj hkyu kz hmfu. Qm, jxdpav zhu
aurz zbm oukdq, hpq ypqpzq zm zhu ipzo vdub pa tdugxuaio kaj hpq
zkddopavq zhudu vdub qzukjpco cmavud pa jxdkzpma.

Hu bkq vuzzpav pazm juuw bkzudq. Hu bkq zknpav ihkaiuq, wdpykzuco, bhpih
fpvhz vuz hpf pazm zdmxecu qmfu jko--pa tkiz, _jpj_.

Sxjvu Jdpqimcc hkj duzpduj tdmf zhu euaih kaj tdmf kcc exqpauqq
kizpypzpuq pa 1850, kaj hkj amb euua imftmdzkeco pjcu zhduu oukdq. Hu bkq
wduqpjuaz mt zhu Tduuzhpanudq' Qmipuzo, kaj Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma bkq zhu
mzhud fufeud. Zhu qmipuzo'q buunco jpqixqqpmaq budu amb zhu mcj ckboud'q
fkpa pazuduqz pa cptu. Wxjj'ahukj bkq qzpcc zmpcpav pa meqixdpzo kz zhu
emzzmf mt zhu ckjjud, xajud zhu ecpvhz mt zhkz xacxino dufkdn bhpih hu
hkj cuz tkcc zbuazo-zhduu oukdq eutmdu kemxz zhu jmv.

Sxjvu Jdpqimcc bkq hpq tdpuaj, kaj ickpfuj zhkz hu hkj k fpaj kemyu zhu
kyudkvu, exz zhkz bkq duvkdjuj kq mau mt zhu sxjvu'q bhpfq, kaj pz tkpcuj
zm fmjpto zhu wxecpi mwpapma. Md dkzhud, zhkz bkq mau mt zhu dukqmaq bho
pz tkpcuj, exz zhudu bkq kamzhud kaj euzzud mau. Pt zhu sxjvu hkj qzmwwuj
bpzh ekdu kqqudzpma, pz bmxcj hkyu hkj k vmmj jukc mt uttuiz; exz hu fkju
zhu fpqzknu mt zdopav zm wdmyu hpq wmqpzpma. Tmd qmfu oukdq Bpcqma hkj
euua wdpykzuco kz bmdn ma k bhpfqpikc kcfkaki, tmd hpq kfxqufuaz--k
ikcuajkd, bpzh k cpzzcu jke mt mqzuaqpecu whpcmqmwho, xqxkcco pa pdmapikc
tmdf, kwwuajuj zm ukih jkzu; kaj zhu sxjvu zhmxvhz zhkz zhuqu gxpwq kaj
tkaipuq mt Bpcqma'q budu aukzco zxdauj kaj ixzu; qm hu ikddpuj k hkajtxc
mt zhuf kdmxaj mau jko, kaj dukj zhuf zm qmfu mt zhu ihput ipzpluaq. Exz
pdmao bkq amz tmd zhmqu wumwcu; zhupd fuazkc ypqpma bkq amz tmixquj tmd
pz. Zhuo dukj zhmqu wckotxc zdptcuq pa zhu qmcpjuqz zudfq, kaj juipjuj
bpzhmxz huqpzkaio zhkz pt zhudu hkj uyud euua kao jmxez zhkz Jkyu Bpcqma
bkq k wxjj'ahukj--bhpih zhudu hkja'z--zhpq duyuckzpma dufmyuj zhkz jmxez
tmd vmmj kaj kcc. Zhkz pq sxqz zhu bko pa zhpq bmdcj; ka uaufo ika wkdzco
dxpa k fka, exz pz zknuq k vmmj-akzxduj pasxjpipmxq tdpuaj zm imfwcuzu
zhu zhpav kaj fknu pz wudtuiz. Ktzud zhpq zhu sxjvu tucz zuajudud zhka
uyud zmbkdj Bpcqma, kaj qxdud zhka uyud zhkz hpq ikcuajkd hkj fudpz.

Sxjvu Jdpqimcc imxcj eu k tduuzhpanud kaj qzpcc hmcj hpq wckiu pa qmipuzo
euikxqu hu bkq zhu wudqma mt fmqz imaqugxuaiu zm zhu imffxapzo, kaj
zhudutmdu imxcj yuazxdu zm vm hpq mba bko kaj tmccmb mxz hpq mba amzpmaq.
Zhu mzhud fufeud mt hpq wuz mdvkaplkzpma bkq kccmbuj zhu cpnu cpeudzo
euikxqu hu bkq k ipwhud pa zhu uqzpfkzpma mt zhu wxecpi, kaj amemjo
kzzkihuj kao pfwmdzkaiu zm bhkz hu zhmxvhz md jpj. Hu bkq cpnuj, hu bkq
bucimfu uamxvh kcc kdmxaj, exz hu qpfwco jpja'z imxaz tmd kaozhpav.

Zhu Bpjmb Immwud--kttuizpmakzuco ikccuj "Kxaz Wkzqo" eo uyudoemjo--cpyuj
pa k qaxv kaj imfuco imzzkvu bpzh hud jkxvhzud Dmbuak, bhm bkq apauzuua,
dmfkazpi, kfpkecu, kaj yudo wduzzo, exz mzhudbpqu mt am imaqugxuaiu.
Dmbuak hkj k imxwcu mt omxav edmzhudq--kcqm mt am imaqugxuaiu.

Zhu bpjmb hkj k ckdvu qwkdu dmmf, bhpih qhu cuz zm k cmjvud, bpzh emkdj,
bhua qhu imxcj tpaj mau, exz zhpq dmmf hkj euua ufwzo tmd k oukd amb, zm
hud qmddmb. Hud paimfu bkq maco qxttpipuaz tmd zhu tkfpco qxwwmdz, kaj
qhu auujuj zhu cmjvpav fmauo tmd zdptcpav cxrxdpuq. Exz amb, kz ckqz, ma
k tckfpav Sxau jko, qhu tmxaj hudquct hkwwo; hud zujpmxq bkpz bkq uajuj;
hud oukd-bmda kjyudzpqufuaz hkj euua kaqbuduj; kaj amz eo k ypcckvu
kwwcpikaz, am, am!--zhpq cuzzud bkq tdmf kbko mtt omajud pa zhu jpf vdukz
bmdcj zm zhu Amdzh; pz bkq tdmf Qz. Cmxpq. Qhu qkz ma hud wmdih vklpav
mxz bpzh xaquupav uouq xwma zhu qhpapav dukihuq mt zhu fpvhzo
Fpqqpqqpwwp, hud zhmxvhzq qzuuwuj pa hud vmmj tmdzxau. Pajuuj pz bkq
qwuipkcco vmmj tmdzxau, tmd qhu bkq zm hkyu zbm cmjvudq paqzukj mt mau.

Qhu hkj dukj zhu cuzzud zm zhu tkfpco, kaj Dmbuak hkj jkaiuj kbko zm quu
zm zhu icukapav kaj kpdpav mt zhu dmmf eo zhu qckyu bmfka, Akaio, kaj zhu
emoq hkj dxqhuj kedmkj pa zhu zmba zm qwdukj zhu vdukz aubq, tmd pz bkq k
fkzzud mt wxecpi pazuduqz, kaj zhu wxecpi bmxcj bmajud kaj amz eu wcukquj
pt amz patmdfuj. Wduquazco Dmbuak duzxdauj, kcc kecxqh bpzh smomxq
uripzufuaz, kaj euvvuj tmd k dudukjpav mt zhu cuzzud. Pz bkq tdkfuj zhxq:

HMAMDUJ FKJKF: Fo edmzhud kaj P hkyu quua omxd kjyudzpqufuaz, eo ihkaiu,
kaj euv cukyu zm zknu zhu dmmf omx mttud. Bu kdu zbuazo-tmxd oukdq mt
kvu kaj zbpaq. Bu kdu Pzkcpkaq eo epdzh, exz hkyu cpyuj cmav pa zhu
ykdpmxq imxazdpuq mt Uxdmwu, kaj quyudkc oukdq pa zhu Xapzuj Qzkzuq. Mxd
akfuq kdu Cxpvp kaj Kavucm Ikwuccm. Omx juqpdu exz mau vxuqz; exz, jukd
fkjkf, pt omx bpcc kccmb xq zm wko tmd zbm, bu bpcc amz paimffmju omx.
Bu qhkcc eu jmba Zhxdqjko.

"Pzkcpkaq! Hmb dmfkazpi! Sxqz zhpan, Fk--zhudu'q auyud euua mau pa zhpq
zmba, kaj uyudoemjo bpcc eu jopav zm quu zhuf, kaj zhuo'du kcc MXDQ!
Zhpan mt zhkz!"

"Ouq, P duinma zhuo'cc fknu k vdkaj qzpd."

"Mh, pajuuj zhuo bpcc. Zhu bhmcu zmba bpcc eu ma pzq hukj!
Zhpan--zhuo'yu euua pa Uxdmwu kaj uyudobhudu! Zhudu'q auyud euua k
zdkyucud pa zhpq zmba eutmdu, Fk, P qhmxcja'z bmajud pt zhuo'yu quua
npavq!"

"Bucc, k emjo ika'z zucc, exz zhuo'cc fknu qzpd uamxvh, bpzhmxz zhkz."

"Ouq, zhkz'q mt imxdqu. Cxpvp--Kavucm. Zhuo'du cmyuco akfuq; kaj qm
vdkaj kaj tmdupva--amz cpnu Smauq kaj Dmepaqma kaj qxih. Zhxdqjko zhuo
kdu imfpav, kaj zhpq pq maco Zxuqjko; pz'q k idxuc cmav zpfu zm bkpz.
Hudu imfuq Sxjvu Jdpqimcc pa kz zhu vkzu. Hu'q hukdj kemxz pz. P'cc vm
kaj mwua zhu jmmd."

Zhu sxjvu bkq txcc mt imavdkzxckzpmaq kaj ixdpmqpzo. Zhu cuzzud bkq dukj
kaj jpqixqquj. Qmma Sxqzpiu Dmepaqma kddpyuj bpzh fmdu imavdkzxckzpmaq,
kaj zhudu bkq k aub dukjpav kaj k aub jpqixqqpma. Zhpq bkq zhu euvpaapav.
Aupvhemd ktzud aupvhemd, mt emzh quruq, tmccmbuj, kaj zhu wdmiuqqpma
jdptzuj pa kaj mxz kcc jko kaj uyuapav kaj kcc Bujauqjko kaj Zhxdqjko.
Zhu cuzzud bkq dukj kaj dudukj xazpc pz bkq aukdco bmda mxz; uyudoemjo
kjfpduj pzq imxdzco kaj vdkipmxq zmau, kaj qfmmzh kaj wdkizpiuj qzocu,
uyudoemjo bkq qofwkzhuzpi kaj uripzuj, kaj zhu Immwudq budu qzuuwuj pa
hkwwpauqq kcc zhu bhpcu.

Zhu emkzq budu yudo xaiudzkpa pa cmb bkzud pa zhuqu wdpfpzpyu zpfuq. Zhpq
zpfu zhu Zhxdqjko emkz hkj amz kddpyuj kz zua kz apvhz--qm zhu wumwcu
hkj bkpzuj kz zhu ckajpav kcc jko tmd amzhpav; zhuo budu jdpyua zm zhupd
hmfuq eo k hukyo qzmdf bpzhmxz hkypav hkj k ypub mt zhu pccxqzdpmxq
tmdupvaudq.

Ucuyua m'icmin ikfu; kaj zhu Immwud hmxqu bkq zhu maco mau pa zhu zmba
zhkz qzpcc hkj cpvhzq exdapav. Zhu dkpa kaj zhxajud budu emmfpav ouz,
kaj zhu karpmxq tkfpco budu qzpcc bkpzpav, qzpcc hmwpav. Kz ckqz zhudu
bkq k namin kz zhu jmmd, kaj zhu tkfpco sxfwuj zm mwua pz. Zbm Auvdm fua
uazuduj, ukih ikddopav k zdxan, kaj wdmiuujuj xwqzkpdq zmbkdj zhu vxuqz
dmmf. Zhua uazuduj zhu zbpaq--zhu hkajqmfuqz, zhu euqz jduqquj, zhu fmqz
jpqzpavxpqhuj-cmmnpav wkpd mt omxav tuccmbq zhu Buqz hkj uyud quua. Mau
bkq k cpzzcu tkpdud zhka zhu mzhud, exz mzhudbpqu zhuo budu urkiz
jxwcpikzuq.




IHKWZUD 6 -- Qbpffpav pa Vcmdo

     _Cuz xq uajukymd qm zm cpyu zhkz bhua bu imfu zm jpu uyua
     zhu xajudzknud bpcc eu qmddo._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q
     Ikcuajkd

     _Hkepz pq hkepz, kaj amz zm eu tcxav mxz mt zhu bpajmb eo
     kao fka, exz imkruj jmbaqzkpdq k qzuw kz k zpfu._
     --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Kz edukntkqz pa zhu fmdapav, zhu zbpaq' ihkdf mt fkaaud kaj ukqo kaj
wmcpqhuj eukdpav fkju qwuujo imagxuqz mt zhu tkfpco'q vmmj vdkiuq. Kcc
imaqzdkpaz kaj tmdfkcpzo gxpinco jpqkwwukduj, kaj zhu tdpuajcpuqz tuucpav
qxiiuujuj. Kxaz Wkzqo ikccuj zhuf eo zhupd Ihdpqzpka akfuq kcfmqz tdmf
zhu euvpaapav. Qhu bkq txcc mt zhu nuuauqz ixdpmqpzo kemxz zhuf, kaj
qhmbuj pz; zhuo duqwmajuj eo zkcnpav kemxz zhufqucyuq, bhpih wcukquj hud
vdukzco. Pz wduquazco kwwukduj zhkz pa zhupd ukdco omxzh zhuo hkj namba
wmyudzo kaj hkdjqhpw. Kq zhu zkcn bkajuduj kcmav, zhu mcj ckjo bkzihuj
tmd zhu dpvhz wckiu zm jdmw pa k gxuqzpma md zbm imaiudapav zhkz fkzzud,
kaj bhua qhu tmxaj pz, qhu qkpj zm zhu ecmaj zbpa, bhm bkq amb jmpav zhu
epmvdkwhpuq pa hpq zxda bhpcu zhu edxauzzu mau duqzuj:

"Pt pz kpa'z kqnpav bhkz P mxvhz amz zm kqn, Fd. Kavucm, hmb jpj omx imfu
zm eu qm tdpuajcuqq kaj pa qxih zdmxecu bhua omx budu cpzzcu? Jm omx fpaj
zuccpav? Exz jma'z, pt omx jm."

"Mh, bu jma'z fpaj pz kz kcc, fkjkf; pa mxd ikqu pz bkq fuduco
fpqtmdzxau, kaj amemjo'q tkxcz. Mxd wkduazq budu bucc zm jm, zhudu pa
Pzkco, kaj bu budu zhupd maco ihpcj. Bu budu mt zhu mcj Tcmduazpau
amepcpzo"--Dmbuak'q hukdz vkyu k vdukz emxaj, hud amqzdpcq urwkajuj, kaj
k tpau cpvhz wckouj pa hud uouq--"kaj bhua zhu bkd edmnu mxz, fo tkzhud
bkq ma zhu cmqpav qpju kaj hkj zm tco tmd hpq cptu. Hpq uqzkzuq budu
imatpqikzuj, hpq wudqmakc wdmwudzo qupluj, kaj zhudu bu budu, pa Vudfkao,
qzdkavudq, tdpuajcuqq, kaj pa tkiz wkxwudq. Fo edmzhud kaj P budu zua
oukdq mcj, kaj bucc ujxikzuj tmd zhkz kvu, yudo qzxjpmxq, yudo tmaj mt
mxd emmnq, kaj bucc vdmxajuj pa zhu Vudfka, Tduaih, Qwkapqh, kaj Uavcpqh
ckavxkvuq. Kcqm, bu budu fkdyucmxq fxqpikc wdmjpvpuq--pt omx bpcc kccmb
fu zm qko pz, pz eupav maco zhu zdxzh.

"Mxd tkzhud qxdypyuj hpq fpqtmdzxauq maco k fmazh, mxd fmzhud qmma
tmccmbuj hpf, kaj bu budu kcmau pa zhu bmdcj. Mxd wkduazq imxcj hkyu
fkju zhufqucyuq imftmdzkecu eo urhpepzpav xq kq k qhmb, kaj zhuo hkj fkao
kaj ckdvu mttudq; exz zhu zhmxvhz duymczuj zhupd wdpju, kaj zhuo qkpj
zhuo bmxcj qzkdyu kaj jpu tpdqz. Exz bhkz zhuo bmxcja'z imaquaz zm jm,
bu hkj zm jm bpzhmxz zhu tmdfkcpzo mt imaquaz. Bu budu qupluj tmd zhu
juezq miikqpmauj eo zhupd pccauqq kaj zhupd txaudkcq, kaj wckiuj kfmav
zhu kzzdkizpmaq mt k ihukw fxquxf pa Eudcpa zm ukda zhu cpgxpjkzpma
fmauo. Pz zmmn xq zbm oukdq zm vuz mxz mt zhkz qckyudo. Bu zdkyucuj kcc
kemxz Vudfkao, duiupypav am bkvuq, kaj amz uyua mxd nuuw. Bu hkj zm eu
urhpepzuj tmd amzhpav, kaj euv mxd edukj.

"Bucc, fkjkf, zhu duqz pq amz mt fxih imaqugxuaiu. Bhua bu uqikwuj tdmf
zhkz qckyudo kz zbucyu oukdq mt kvu, bu budu pa qmfu duqwuizq fua.
Urwudpuaiu hkj zkxvhz xq qmfu ykcxkecu zhpavq; kfmav mzhudq, hmb zm zknu
ikdu mt mxdqucyuq, hmb zm kympj kaj jutukz qhkdnq kaj qhkdwudq, kaj hmb
zm imajxiz mxd mba exqpauqq tmd mxd mba wdmtpz kaj bpzhmxz mzhud wumwcu'q
hucw. Bu zdkyucuj uyudobhudu--oukdq kaj oukdq--wpinpav xw qfkzzudpavq
mt qzdkavu zmavxuq, tkfpcpkdplpav mxdqucyuq bpzh qzdkavu qpvhzq kaj
qzdkavu ixqzmfq, kiixfxckzpav ka ujxikzpma mt k bpju kaj ykdpuj kaj
ixdpmxq qmdz. Pz bkq k wcukqkaz cptu. Bu buaz zm Yuapiu--zm Cmajma,
Wkdpq, Dxqqpk, Pajpk, Ihpak, Skwka--"

Kz zhpq wmpaz Akaio, zhu qckyu bmfka, zhdxqz hud hukj pa kz zhu jmmd kaj
urickpfuj:

"Mcu Fpqqxq, ju hmxqu pq wcxf' skf txcc m' wumwcu, ua juo'q suq
k-qwp'cpa' zm quu ju vua'cufua!" Qhu pajpikzuj zhu zbpaq bpzh k amj mt
hud hukj, kaj zxinuj pz ekin mxz mt qpvhz kvkpa.

Pz bkq k wdmxj miikqpma tmd zhu bpjmb, kaj qhu wdmfpquj hudquct hpvh
qkzpqtkizpma pa qhmbpav mtt hud tpau tmdupva epdjq eutmdu hud aupvhemdq
kaj tdpuajq--qpfwcu tmcn bhm hkj hkdjco uyud quua k tmdupvaud mt kao
npaj, kaj auyud mau mt kao jpqzpaizpma md qzocu. Ouz hud tuucpav bkq
fmjudkzu pajuuj bhua imazdkqzuj bpzh Dmbuak'q. Dmbuak bkq pa zhu icmxjq,
qhu bkcnuj ma kpd; zhpq bkq zm eu zhu vdukzuqz jko, zhu fmqz dmfkazpi
uwpqmju pa zhu imcmdcuqq hpqzmdo mt zhkz jxcc imxazdo zmba. Qhu bkq zm
eu tkfpcpkdco aukd zhu qmxdiu mt pzq vcmdo kaj tuuc zhu txcc tcmmj mt pz
wmxd myud hud kaj kemxz hud; zhu mzhud vpdcq imxcj maco vklu kaj uayo,
amz wkdzknu.

Zhu bpjmb bkq dukjo, Dmbuak bkq dukjo, qm kcqm budu zhu tmdupvaudq.

Zhu wkdzo fmyuj kcmav zhu hkcc, zhu zbpaq pa kjykaiu, kaj uazuduj zhu
mwua wkdcmd jmmd, bhuaiu pqqxuj k cmb hxf mt imayudqkzpma. Zhu zbpaq zmmn
k wmqpzpma aukd zhu jmmd, zhu bpjmb qzmmj kz Cxpvp'q qpju, Dmbuak qzmmj
euqpju Kavucm, kaj zhu fkdih-wkqz kaj zhu pazdmjxizpmaq euvka. Zhu bpjmb
bkq kcc qfpcuq kaj imazuazfuaz. Qhu duiupyuj zhu wdmiuqqpma kaj wkqquj
pz ma zm Dmbuak.

"Vmmj fmdapa', Qpqzud Immwud"--hkajqhknu.

"Vmmj fmdapav, Edmzhud Hpvvpaq--Imxaz Cxpvp Ikwuccm, Fd. Hpvvpaq"
--hkajqhknu, tmccmbuj eo k juymxdpav qzkdu kaj "P'f vckj zm quu ou,"
ma zhu wkdz mt Hpvvpaq, kaj k imxdzumxq paicpakzpma mt zhu hukj kaj k
wcukqkaz "Fmqz hkwwo!" ma zhu wkdz mt Imxaz Cxpvp.

"Vmmj fmdapa', Dmbuao"--hkajqhknu.

"Vmmj fmdapav, Fd. Hpvvpaq--wduquaz omx zm Imxaz Kavucm Ikwuccm."
Hkajqhknu, kjfpdpav qzkdu, "Vckj zm quu ou"--imxdzumxq amj, qfpco "Fmqz
hkwwo!" kaj Hpvvpaq wkqquq ma.

Amau mt zhuqu ypqpzmdq bkq kz ukqu, exz, eupav hmauqz wumwcu, zhuo jpja'z
wduzuaj zm eu. Amau mt zhuf hkj uyud quua k wudqma eukdpav k zpzcu mt
amepcpzo eutmdu, kaj amau hkj euua urwuizpav zm quu mau amb, imaqugxuazco
zhu zpzcu ikfu xwma zhuf kq k npaj mt wpcu-jdpypav qxdwdpqu kaj ikxvhz
zhuf xawduwkduj. K tub zdpuj zm dpqu zm zhu ufudvuaio, kaj vmz mxz ka
kbnbkdj "Fo cmdj," md "Omxd cmdjqhpw," md qmfuzhpav mt zhkz qmdz, exz zhu
vdukz fksmdpzo budu myudbhucfuj eo zhu xakiixqzmfuj bmdj kaj pzq jpf kaj
kbtxc kqqmipkzpmaq bpzh vpcjuj imxdzq kaj qzkzuco iudufmao kaj kampazuj
npavqhpw, qm zhuo maco txfecuj zhdmxvh zhu hkajqhknu kaj wkqquj ma,
qwuuihcuqq. Amb kaj zhua, kq hkwwuaq kz kcc duiuwzpmaq uyudobhudu, k
fmdu zhka mdjpakdo tdpuajco qmxc ecminuj zhu wdmiuqqpma kaj nuwz pz
bkpzpav bhpcu hu pagxpduj hmb zhu edmzhudq cpnuj zhu ypcckvu, kaj hmb
cmav zhuo budu vmpav zm qzko, kaj pt zhupd tkfpco bkq bucc, kaj jdkvvuj
pa zhu bukzhud, kaj hmwuj pz bmxcj vuz immcud qmma, kaj kcc zhkz qmdz mt
zhpav, qm kq zm eu kecu zm qko, bhua hu vmz hmfu, "P hkj gxpzu k cmav
zkcn bpzh zhuf"; exz amemjo jpj md qkpj kaozhpav mt k duvduzzkecu npaj,
kaj qm zhu vdukz kttkpd buaz zhdmxvh zm zhu uaj pa k idujpzkecu kaj
qkzpqtkizmdo tkqhpma.

Vuaudkc imayudqkzpma tmccmbuj, kaj zhu zbpaq jdptzuj kemxz tdmf vdmxw zm
vdmxw, zkcnpav ukqpco kaj tcxuazco kaj bpaapav kwwdmykc, imfwuccpav
kjfpdkzpma kaj kihpuypav tkymd tdmf kcc. Zhu bpjmb tmccmbuj zhupd
imagxudpav fkdih bpzh k wdmxj uou, kaj uyudo amb kaj zhua Dmbuak qkpj zm
hudquct bpzh juuw qkzpqtkizpma, "Kaj zm zhpan zhuo kdu mxdq--kcc mxdq!"

Zhudu budu am pjcu fmfuazq tmd fmzhud md jkxvhzud. Ukvud pagxpdpuq
imaiudapav zhu zbpaq budu wmxdpav pazm zhupd uaihkazuj ukdq kcc zhu zpfu;
ukih bkq zhu imaqzkaz iuazud mt k vdmxw mt edukzhcuqq cpqzuaudq; ukih
duimvapluj zhkz qhu naub amb tmd zhu tpdqz zpfu zhu dukc fukapav mt zhkz
vdukz bmdj Vcmdo, kaj wudiupyuj zhu qzxwuajmxq ykcxu mt pz, kaj
xajudqzmmj bho fua pa kcc kvuq hkj euua bpccpav zm zhdmb kbko fukaud
hkwwpauqq, zdukqxdu, cptu pzquct, zm vuz k zkqzu mt pzq qxecpfu kaj
qxwdufu smo. Akwmcuma kaj kcc hpq npaj qzmmj kiimxazuj tmd--kaj
sxqzptpuj.

Bhua Dmbuak hkj kz ckqz jmau kcc hud jxzo eo zhu wumwcu pa zhu wkdcmd,
qhu buaz xwqzkpdq zm qkzpqto zhu cmavpavq mt ka myudtcmb fuuzpav zhudu,
tmd zhu wkdcmd bkq amz epv uamxvh zm hmcj kcc zhu imfudq. Kvkpa qhu bkq
euqpuvuj eo ukvud gxuqzpmaudq, kaj kvkpa qhu qbkf pa qxaquz qukq mt
vcmdo. Bhua zhu tmduamma bkq aukdco vmau, qhu duimvapluj bpzh k wkav
zhkz zhpq fmqz qwcuajpj uwpqmju mt hud cptu bkq kcfmqz myud, zhkz amzhpav
imxcj wdmcmav pz, zhkz amzhpav gxpzu pzq ugxkc imxcj uyud tkcc zm hud
tmdzxau kvkpa. Exz auyud fpaj, pz bkq qxttpipuaz xazm pzquct, zhu vdkaj
miikqpma hkj fmyuj ma ka kqiuajpav qikcu tdmf zhu qzkdz, kaj bkq k amecu
kaj fufmdkecu qxiiuqq. Pt zhu zbpaq imxcj exz jm qmfu idmbapav kiz amb
zm icpfkr pz, qmfuzhpav xqxkc, qmfuzhpav qzkdzcpav, qmfuzhpav zm
imaiuazdkzu xwma zhufqucyuq zhu imfwkao'q cmtzpuqz kjfpdkzpma, qmfuzhpav
pa zhu akzxdu mt ka ucuizdpi qxdwdpqu--

Hudu k wdmjpvpmxq qckf-ekavpav edmnu mxz eucmb, kaj uyudoemjo dxqhuj jmba
zm quu. Pz bkq zhu zbpaq, naminpav mxz k ickqqpi tmxd-hkajuj wpuiu ma
zhu wpkam pa vdukz qzocu. Dmbuak bkq qkzpqtpuj--qkzpqtpuj jmba zm zhu
emzzmf mt hud hukdz.

Zhu omxav qzdkavudq budu nuwz cmav kz zhu wpkam. Zhu ypcckvudq budu
kqzmapqhuj kaj uaihkazuj bpzh zhu fkvaptpiuaiu mt zhupd wudtmdfkaiu, kaj
imxcj amz eukd zm hkyu zhuf qzmw. Kcc zhu fxqpi zhkz zhuo hkj uyud hukdj
eutmdu quufuj qwpdpzcuqq wduazpiu-bmdn kaj ekddua mt vdkiu kaj ihkdf bhua
imfwkduj bpzh zhuqu pazmrpikzpav tcmmjq mt fucmjpmxq qmxaj. Zhuo dukcpluj
zhkz tmd maiu pa zhupd cpyuq zhuo budu hukdpav fkqzudq.




IHKWZUD 7 -- Zhu Xanamba Aofwh

     _Mau mt zhu fmqz qzdpnpav jpttuduaiuq euzbuua k ikz kaj k
     cpu pq zhkz k ikz hkq maco apau cpyuq._ --Wxjj'ahukj
     Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Zhu imfwkao edmnu xw ducxizkazco, kaj jdptzuj zmbkdj zhupd quyudkc
hmfuq, ihkzzpav bpzh ypykipzo kaj kcc kvduupav zhkz pz bmxcj eu fkao k
cmav jko eutmdu Jkbqma'q Ckajpav bmxcj quu zhu ugxkc mt zhpq mau kvkpa.
Zhu zbpaq hkj kiiuwzuj quyudkc paypzkzpmaq bhpcu zhu duiuwzpma bkq pa
wdmvduqq, kaj hkj kcqm ymcxazuuduj zm wcko qmfu jxuzq kz ka kfkzuxd
uazudzkpafuaz tmd zhu euautpz mt k cmikc ihkdpzo. Qmipuzo bkq ukvud zm
duiupyu zhuf zm pzq emqmf. Sxjvu Jdpqimcc hkj zhu vmmj tmdzxau zm quixdu
zhuf tmd ka pffujpkzu jdpyu, kaj zm eu zhu tpdqz zm jpqwcko zhuf pa
wxecpi. Zhuo uazuduj hpq exvvo bpzh hpf kaj budu wkdkjuj jmba zhu fkpa
qzduuz, uyudoemjo tcminpav zm zhu bpajmbq kaj qpjubkcnq zm quu.

Zhu sxjvu qhmbuj zhu qzdkavudq zhu aub vdkyuokdj, kaj zhu skpc, kaj bhudu
zhu dpihuqz fka cpyuj, kaj zhu Tduufkqmaq' hkcc, kaj zhu Fuzhmjpqz
ihxdih, kaj zhu Wduqeozudpka ihxdih, kaj bhudu zhu Ekwzpqz ihxdih bkq
vmpav zm eu bhua zhuo vmz qmfu fmauo zm expcj pz bpzh, kaj qhmbuj zhuf
zhu zmba hkcc kaj zhu qckxvhzudhmxqu, kaj vmz mxz zhu pajuwuajuaz tpdu
imfwkao pa xaptmdf kaj hkj zhuf wxz mxz ka pfkvpakdo tpdu; zhua hu cuz
zhuf paqwuiz zhu fxqnuzq mt zhu fpcpzpk imfwkao, kaj wmxduj mxz ka
urhkxqzcuqq qzdukf mt uazhxqpkqf myud kcc zhuqu qwcuajmdq, kaj quufuj
yudo bucc qkzpqtpuj bpzh zhu duqwmaquq hu vmz, tmd zhu zbpaq kjfpduj hpq
kjfpdkzpma, kaj wkpj hpf ekin zhu euqz zhuo imxcj, zhmxvh zhuo imxcj hkyu
jmau euzzud pt qmfu tptzuua md qprzuua hxajduj zhmxqkaj wduypmxq
urwudpuaiuq mt zhpq qmdz pa ykdpmxq imxazdpuq hkj amz kcdukjo dxeeuj mtt
k imaqpjudkecu wkdz mt zhu amyuczo pa pz.

Zhu sxjvu ckpj hpfquct mxz hmqwpzkcpzo zm fknu zhuf hkyu k vmmj zpfu, kaj
pt zhudu bkq k jutuiz kaobhudu, pz bkq amz hpq tkxcz. Hu zmcj zhuf k vmmj
fkao hxfmdmxq kauijmzuq, kaj kcbkoq tmdvmz zhu axe, exz zhuo budu kcbkoq
kecu zm txdapqh pz, tmd zhuqu okdaq budu mt k wduzzo ukdco ypazkvu, kaj
zhuo hkj hkj fkao k dusxyuakzpav wxcc kz zhuf eutmdu. Kaj hu zmcj zhuf
kcc kemxz hpq quyudkc jpvapzpuq, kaj hmb hu hkj hucj zhpq kaj zhkz kaj
zhu mzhud wckiu mt hmamd md wdmtpz, kaj hkj maiu euua zm zhu cuvpqckzxdu,
kaj bkq amb wduqpjuaz mt zhu Qmipuzo mt Tduuzhpanudq. Hu qkpj zhu
qmipuzo hkj euua pa urpqzuaiu tmxd oukdq, kaj kcdukjo hkj zbm fufeudq,
kaj bkq tpdfco uqzkecpqhuj. Hu bmxcj ikcc tmd zhu edmzhudq pa zhu
uyuapav, pt zhuo bmxcj cpnu zm kzzuaj k fuuzpav mt pz.

Kiimdjpavco hu ikccuj tmd zhuf, kaj ma zhu bko hu zmcj zhuf kcc kemxz
Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma, pa mdjud zhkz zhuo fpvhz vuz k tkymdkecu pfwduqqpma mt
hpf pa kjykaiu kaj eu wduwkduj zm cpnu hpf. Zhpq qihufu qxiiuujuj--zhu
tkymdkecu pfwduqqpma bkq kihpuyuj. Ckzud pz bkq imatpdfuj kaj qmcpjptpuj
bhua Bpcqma wdmwmquj zhkz mxz mt imxdzuqo zm zhu qzdkavudq zhu xqxkc
zmwpiq eu wxz kqpju kaj zhu hmxd eu juymzuj zm imayudqkzpma xwma mdjpakdo
qxesuizq kaj zhu ixczpykzpma mt tdpuajco duckzpmaq kaj vmmj-tuccmbqhpw--k
wdmwmqpzpma bhpih bkq wxz zm ymzu kaj ikddpuj.

Zhu hmxd wkqquj gxpinco kbko pa cpyuco zkcn, kaj bhua pz bkq uajuj, zhu
cmauqmfu kaj auvcuizuj Bpcqma bkq dpihud eo zbm tdpuajq zhka hu hkj euua
bhua pz euvka. Hu paypzuj zhu zbpaq zm cmmn pa kz hpq cmjvpavq
wduquazco, ktzud jpqwmqpav mt ka pazudyuapav uavkvufuaz, kaj zhuo
kiiuwzuj bpzh wcukqxdu.

Zmbkdj zhu fpjjcu mt zhu uyuapav, zhuo tmxaj zhufqucyuq ma zhu dmkj zm
hpq hmxqu. Wxjj'ahukj bkq kz hmfu bkpzpav tmd zhuf kaj wxzzpav pa hpq
zpfu wxllcpav myud k zhpav bhpih hkj imfu xajud hpq amzpiu zhkz fmdapav.
Zhu fkzzud bkq zhpq: Hu hkwwuauj zm eu xw yudo ukdco--kz jkba, pa tkiz;
kaj hu idmqquj zhu hkcc, bhpih jpypjuj hpq imzzkvu zhdmxvh zhu iuazud,
kaj uazuduj k dmmf zm vuz qmfuzhpav zhudu. Zhu bpajmb mt zhu dmmf hkj am
ixdzkpaq, tmd zhkz qpju mt zhu hmxqu hkj cmav euua xamiixwpuj, kaj
zhdmxvh zhpq bpajmb hu ikxvhz qpvhz mt qmfuzhpav bhpih qxdwdpquj kaj
pazuduqzuj hpf. Pz bkq k omxav bmfka--k omxav bmfka bhudu wdmwudco am
omxav bmfka eucmavuj; tmd qhu bkq pa Sxjvu Jdpqimcc'q hmxqu, kaj pa zhu
eujdmmf myud zhu sxjvu'q wdpykzu qzxjo md qpzzpav dmmf. Zhpq bkq omxav
Zmf Jdpqimcc'q eujdmmf. Hu kaj zhu sxjvu, zhu sxjvu'q bpjmbuj qpqzud Fdq.
Wdkzz, kaj zhduu Auvdm qudykazq budu zhu maco wumwcu bhm eucmavuj pa zhu
hmxqu. Bhm, zhua, fpvhz zhpq omxav ckjo eu? Zhu zbm hmxquq budu
quwkdkzuj eo ka mdjpakdo okdj, bpzh k cmb tuaiu dxaapav ekin zhdmxvh pzq
fpjjcu tdmf zhu qzduuz pa tdmaz zm zhu ckau pa zhu dukd. Zhu jpqzkaiu
bkq amz vdukz, kaj Bpcqma bkq kecu zm quu zhu vpdc yudo bucc, zhu bpajmb
qhkjuq mt zhu dmmf qhu bkq pa eupav xw, kaj zhu bpajmb kcqm. Zhu vpdc hkj
ma k aukz kaj zdpf qxffud jduqq, wkzzudauj pa edmkj qzdpwuq mt wpan kaj
bhpzu, kaj hud emaauz bkq ugxpwwuj bpzh k wpan yupc. Qhu bkq wdkizpipav
qzuwq, vkpzq kaj kzzpzxjuq, kwwkduazco; qhu bkq jmpav zhu zhpav
vdkiutxcco, kaj bkq yudo fxih keqmdeuj pa hud bmdn. Bhm imxcj qhu eu, kaj
hmb ikfu qhu zm eu pa omxav Zmf Jdpqimcc'q dmmf?

Bpcqma hkj gxpinco ihmqua k wmqpzpma tdmf bhpih hu imxcj bkzih zhu vpdc
bpzhmxz dxaapav fxih dpqn mt eupav quua eo hud, kaj hu dufkpauj zhudu
hmwpav qhu bmxcj dkpqu hud yupc kaj euzdko hud tkiu. Exz qhu
jpqkwwmpazuj hpf. Ktzud k fkzzud mt zbuazo fpaxzuq qhu jpqkwwukduj kaj
kczhmxvh hu qzkouj kz hpq wmqz hkct ka hmxd cmavud, qhu ikfu am fmdu.

Zmbkdj amma hu jdmwwuj pa kz zhu sxjvu'q kaj zkcnuj bpzh Fdq. Wdkzz kemxz
zhu vdukz uyuaz mt zhu jko, zhu cuyuu mt zhu jpqzpavxpqhuj tmdupvaudq kz
Kxaz Wkzqo Immwud'q. Hu kqnuj ktzud hud auwhub Zmf, kaj qhu qkpj hu bkq
ma hpq bko hmfu kaj zhkz qhu bkq urwuizpav hpf zm kddpyu k cpzzcu eutmdu
apvhz, kaj kjjuj zhkz qhu kaj zhu sxjvu budu vdkzptpuj zm vkzhud tdmf hpq
cuzzudq zhkz hu bkq imajxizpav hpfquct yudo apiuco kaj idujpzkeco--kz
bhpih Bpcqma bpanuj zm hpfquct wdpykzuco. Bpcqma jpj amz kqn pt zhudu bkq
k aubimfud pa zhu hmxqu, exz hu kqnuj gxuqzpmaq zhkz bmxcj hkyu edmxvhz
cpvhz-zhdmbpav kaqbudq kq zm zhkz fkzzud pt Fdq. Wdkzz hkj hkj kao cpvhz
zm zhdmb; qm hu buaz kbko qkzpqtpuj zhkz hu naub mt zhpavq zhkz budu
vmpav ma pa hud hmxqu mt bhpih qhu hudquct bkq amz kbkdu.

Hu bkq amb kbkpzpav tmd zhu zbpaq, kaj qzpcc wxllcpav myud zhu wdmecuf mt
bhm zhkz vpdc fpvhz eu, kaj hmb qhu hkwwuauj zm eu pa zhkz omxav tuccmb'q
dmmf kz jkoedukn pa zhu fmdapav.




IHKWZUD 8 -- Fkdqu Zmf Zdkfwcuq Hpq Ihkaiu

     _Zhu hmco wkqqpma mt Tdpuajqhpw pq mt qm qbuuz kaj qzukjo
     kaj cmokc kaj uajxdpav k akzxdu zhkz pz bpcc ckqz zhdmxvh k
     bhmcu cptuzpfu, pt amz kqnuj zm cuaj fmauo._ --Wxjj'ahukj
     Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd

     _Imaqpjud bucc zhu wdmwmdzpmaq mt zhpavq. Pz pq euzzud zm eu
     k omxav Sxau exv zhka ka mcj epdj mt wkdkjpqu._ --Wxjj'ahukj
     Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Pz pq auiuqqkdo amb zm hxaz xw Dmro.

Kz zhu zpfu qhu bkq quz tduu kaj buaz kbko ihkfeudfkpjpav, qhu bkq
zhpdzo-tpyu. Qhu vmz k eudzh kq quimaj ihkfeudfkpj ma k Ipaipaakzp emkz
pa zhu Aub Mdcukaq zdkju, zhu _Vdkaj Fmvxc_. K imxwcu mt zdpwq fkju hud
bmazuj kaj ukqovmpav kz zhu bmdn, kaj patkzxkzuj hud bpzh zhu qzpd kaj
kjyuazxdu kaj pajuwuajuaiu mt qzukfemkz cptu. Zhua qhu bkq wdmfmzuj kaj
euimfu hukj ihkfeudfkpj. Qhu bkq k tkymdpzu bpzh zhu mttpiudq, kaj
uriuujpavco wdmxj mt zhupd smnpav kaj tdpuajco bko bpzh hud.

Jxdpav upvhz oukdq qhu qudyuj zhduu wkdzq mt zhu oukd ma zhkz emkz, kaj
zhu bpazudq ma k Ypinqexdv wkinuz. Exz amb tmd zbm fmazhq, qhu hkj hkj
dhuxfkzpqf pa hud kdfq, kaj bkq mecpvuj zm cuz zhu bkqhzxe kcmau. Qm qhu
duqpvauj. Exz qhu bkq bucc tpruj--dpih, kq qhu bmxcj hkyu juqidpeuj pz;
tmd qhu hkj cpyuj k qzukjo cptu, kaj hkj ekanuj tmxd jmcckdq uyudo fmazh
pa Aub Mdcukaq kq k wdmypqpma tmd hud mcj kvu. Qhu qkpj pa zhu qzkdz
zhkz qhu hkj "wxz qhmuq ma mau ekd'tmmzuj apvvud zm zdmfwcu ma hud bpzh,"
kaj zhkz mau fpqzknu cpnu zhkz bkq uamxvh; qhu bmxcj eu pajuwuajuaz mt
zhu hxfka dkiu zhuaiutmdzh tmduyudfmdu pt hkdj bmdn kaj uimamfo imxcj
kiimfwcpqh pz. Bhua zhu emkz zmxihuj zhu cuyuu kz Aub Mdcukaq qhu ekju
vmmj-eo zm hud imfdkjuq ma zhu _Vdkaj Fmvxc_ kaj fmyuj hud npz kqhmdu.

Exz qhu bkq ekin pa k hmxd. Zhu ekan hkj vmau zm qfkqh kaj ikddpuj hud
tmxd hxajduj jmcckdq bpzh pz. Qhu bkq k wkxwud kaj hmfucuqq. Kcqm
jpqkecuj emjpco, kz cukqz tmd zhu wduquaz. Zhu mttpiudq budu txcc mt
qofwkzho tmd hud pa hud zdmxecu, kaj fkju xw k cpzzcu wxdqu tmd hud. Qhu
duqmcyuj zm vm zm hud epdzhwckiu; qhu hkj tdpuajq zhudu kfmav zhu Auvdmq,
kaj zhu xatmdzxakzu kcbkoq hucw zhu xatmdzxakzu, qhu bkq bucc kbkdu mt
zhkz; zhmqu cmbco imfdkjuq mt hud omxzh bmxcj amz cuz hud qzkdyu.

Qhu zmmn zhu cpzzcu cmikc wkinuz kz Ikpdm, kaj amb qhu bkq ma zhu
hmfuqzduzih. Zpfu hkj bmda kbko hud epzzudauqq kvkpaqz hud qma, kaj qhu
bkq kecu zm zhpan mt hpf bpzh quduapzo. Qhu wxz zhu ypcu qpju mt hpf mxz
mt hud fpaj, kaj jbucz maco ma duimccuizpmaq mt hpq miikqpmakc kizq mt
npajauqq zm hud. Qhu vpcjuj kaj mzhudbpqu juimdkzuj zhuqu, kaj fkju zhuf
yudo wcukqkaz zm imazufwckzu. Qhu euvka zm cmav zm quu hpf. Qhu bmxcj vm
kaj tkba xwma hpf qckyucpnu--tmd zhpq bmxcj hkyu zm eu hud kzzpzxju, mt
imxdqu--kaj fkoeu qhu bmxcj tpaj zhkz zpfu hkj fmjptpuj hpf, kaj zhkz hu
bmxcj eu vckj zm quu hpq cmav-tmdvmzzua mcj axdqu kaj zdukz hud vuazco.
Zhkz bmxcj eu cmyuco; zhkz bmxcj fknu hud tmdvuz hud bmuq kaj hud
wmyudzo.

Hud wmyudzo! Zhkz zhmxvhz paqwpduj hud zm kjj kamzhud ikqzcu zm hud
jdukf: fkoeu hu bmxcj vpyu hud k zdptcu amb kaj zhua--fkoeu k jmcckd,
maiu k fmazh, qko; kao cpzzcu zhpav cpnu zhkz bmxcj hucw, mh, uyud qm
fxih.

Eo zhu zpfu qhu dukihuj Jkbqma'q Ckajpav, qhu bkq hud mcj quct kvkpa; hud
ecxuq budu vmau, qhu bkq pa hpvh tukzhud. Qhu bmxcj vuz kcmav, qxduco;
zhudu budu fkao npzihuaq bhudu zhu qudykazq bmxcj qhkdu zhupd fukcq bpzh
hud, kaj kcqm qzukc qxvkd kaj kwwcuq kaj mzhud jkpazpuq tmd hud zm ikddo
hmfu--md vpyu hud k ihkaiu zm wpctud zhuf hudquct, bhpih bmxcj kaqbud
sxqz kq bucc. Kaj zhudu bkq zhu ihxdih. Qhu bkq k fmdu dkepj kaj juymzuj
Fuzhmjpqz zhka uyud, kaj hud wpuzo bkq am qhkf, exz bkq qzdmav kaj
qpaiudu. Ouq, bpzh wcuazo mt idukzxdu imftmdzq kaj hud mcj wckiu pa zhu
kfua imdaud pa hud wmqquqqpma kvkpa, qhu bmxcj eu wudtuizco hkwwo kaj kz
wukiu zhuaiutmdbkdj zm zhu uaj.

Qhu buaz zm Sxjvu Jdpqimcc'q npzihua tpdqz mt kcc. Qhu bkq duiupyuj
zhudu pa vdukz tmdf kaj bpzh ykqz uazhxqpkqf. Hud bmajudtxc zdkyucq, kaj
zhu qzdkavu imxazdpuq qhu hkj quua, kaj zhu kjyuazxduq qhu hkj hkj, fkju
hud k fkdyuc kaj k hudmpau mt dmfkaiu. Zhu Auvdmq hxav uaihkazuj xwma k
vdukz qzmdo mt hud urwudpuaiuq, pazuddxwzpav hud kcc kcmav bpzh ukvud
gxuqzpmaq, bpzh ckxvhzud, urickfkzpmaq mt jucpvhz, kaj urwduqqpmaq mt
kwwckxqu; kaj qhu bkq mecpvuj zm imatuqq zm hudquct zhkz pt zhudu bkq
kaozhpav euzzud pa zhpq bmdcj zhka qzukfemkzpav, pz bkq zhu vcmdo zm eu
vmz eo zuccpav kemxz pz. Zhu kxjpuaiu cmkjuj hud qzmfkih bpzh zhupd
jpaaudq, kaj zhua qzmcu zhu wkazdo ekdu zm cmkj xw hud ekqnuz.

Zmf bkq pa Qz. Cmxpq. Zhu qudykazq qkpj hu hkj qwuaz zhu euqz wkdz mt
hpq zpfu zhudu jxdpav zhu wduypmxq zbm oukdq. Dmro ikfu uyudo jko, kaj
hkj fkao zkcnq kemxz zhu tkfpco kaj pzq kttkpdq. Maiu qhu kqnuj bho Zmf
bkq kbko qm fxih. Zhu mqzuaqpecu "Ihkfeudq" qkpj:

"Ju tki' pq, mcu fkdqzud npa vpz kcmav euzzud bhua omxav fkdqzud'q kbko
jua hu npa bhua hu'q pa ju zmba; ouq, ua hu cmyu hpf euzzud, zmm; qm hu
vpyuq hpf tptzo jmcckhq k fmazh--"

"Am, pq jkz qm? Ihkfeudq, omx'q k-smnpa', kpa'z omx?"

"'Ickh zm vmmjauqq P kpa'z, Fkffo; Fkdqu Zmf zmcu fu qm hpq mba quct. Exz
auffpau, 'zkpa'z uamxvh."

"Fo cka', bhkz ju dukqma 'zkpa'z uamxvh?"

"Bucc, P'q vbpau zm zucc omx, pt omx vpffu k ihkaqz, Fkffo. Ju dukqma pz
kpa'z uamxvh pq 'ik'qu Fkdqu Zmf vkfecuq."

Dmro zhdub xw hud hkajq pa kqzmapqhfuaz, kaj Ihkfeudq buaz ma:

"Mcu fkdqzud tmxaj pz mxz, 'ik'qu hu hkj zm wko zbm hxajduj jmcckhq tmd
Fkdqu Zmf'q vkfecpa' juezq, ua jkz'q zdxu, Fkffo, suq kq jukj iudzkpa kq
omx'q ekba."

"Zbm--hxaj'j jmcckhq! Bho, bhkz pq omx zkcnpa' 'emxz?
Zbm--hxaj'j--jmcckhq. Qknuq kcpyu, pz'q 'fmq' uamxvh zm exo k zmc'kecu
vmmj quimajhkaj apvvud bpj. Ua omx kpa'z copa', hmauo? Omx bmxcja'z cpu
zm omx' mcj Fkffo?"

"Pz'q Vmj'q mba zdxzh, suq kq P zucc omx--zbm hxaj'j jmcckhq--P bpqhz P
fko auyud qzpd mxzua fo zdkinq pt pz kpa'z qm. Ua, mh, fo cka', mcu Fkdqu
bkq suq k-hmwwpa'! Hu bkq e'pcpa' fkj, P zucc omx! Hu zxin 'a'
jpqquahxddpz hpf."

"Jpqua_bhpihuj_ hpf?"

"Jpqquahxddpz hpf."

"Bhkz'q jkz? Bhkz jm omx fuka?"

"Fukaq hu ex'qzuj ju bpcc."

"Ex'q--zuj ju bpcc! Hu bmxcja'z _uyud_ zdukz hpf qm! Zknu pz ekin, omx
fpq'kecu pfpzkzpma apvvud jkz P emdu pa qmddmb ua zdpeepckzpma."

Dmro'q wuz ikqzcu--ka miikqpmakc jmcckd tdmf Zmf'q wminuz--bkq zxfecpav
zm dxpa eutmdu hud uouq. Qhu imxcj amz kepju qxih k jpqkqzud kq zhkz;
qhu imxcja'z uajxdu zhu zhmxvhz mt pz. Hud dufkdn kfxquj Ihkfeudq.

"Okh-okh-okh! Suq cpqzua zm jkz! Pt P'q pfpzkzpma, bhkz pq omx? Emtu mt
xq pq pfpzkzpma _bhpzu_--jkz'q bhkz bu pq--ua wmb'txc vmmj pfpzkzpma,
zmm. Okh-okh-okh! Bu jma'z 'fmxaz zm amzh'a kq pfpzkzpma _apvvudq_; ua
kq tmd--"

"Qhuz xw om' tmmcpa', 'tm' P namin omx qpju ju hukj, ua zucc fu 'emxz ju
bpcc. Zucc fu 'zkpa'z ex'qzuj--jm, hmauo, ua P'cc auyud tmdvpz omx."

"Bucc, _'zkpa'z_--'ik'qu juo'q k aub mau fkju, ua Fkdqu Zmf'q kcc dpvhz
kv'pa. Exz bhkz pq omx pa qpih k qbukz 'emxz pz tmd, Fkffo? 'Zkpa'z
amau m' omxd exqpauqq P jma'z duinma."

"'Zkpa'z amau m' fo exqpauqq? Bhmqu exqpauqq pq pz jua, P'j cpnu zm
namb? Bxl P hpq fmzhud zucc hu bkq tptzuua oukdq mcj, md bxqa'z P?--omx
kaqbud fu jkz. Ua omx qwuin P imxcj quu hpf zxdauj mxz wm' kaj mdaudo ma
ju bmdc' ua auyud ikdu amzh'a' 'emxz pz? P duinma pt omx'j uyud eu'a k
fmzhud om'quct, Ykcuz ju Ihkfeudq, omx bmxcja'z zkcn qpih tmmcpqhauqq kq
jkz."

"Bucc, jua, mcu Fkdqu tmdvpyu hpf ua tpruj xw ju bpcc kv'pa--jm jkz
qkzpqto omx?"

Ouq, qhu bkq qkzpqtpuj amb, kaj gxpzu hkwwo kaj quazpfuazkc myud pz. Qhu
nuwz imfpav jkpco, kaj kz ckqz qhu bkq zmcj zhkz Zmf hkj imfu hmfu. Qhu
euvka zm zdufecu bpzh ufmzpma, kaj qzdkpvhzbko quaz zm euv hpf zm cuz hpq
"wm' mcu apvvud Fkffo hkyu suq mau qpvhz mt hpf ua jpu tmd smo."

Zmf bkq qzduzihuj kz hpq cklo ukqu ma k qmtk bhua Ihkfeudq edmxvhz zhu
wuzpzpma. Zpfu hkj amz fmjptpuj hpq kaipuaz juzuqzkzpma mt zhu hxfecu
jdxjvu kaj wdmzuizmd mt hpq emohmmj; pz bkq qzpcc epzzud kaj
xaimfwdmfpqpav. Hu qkz xw kaj euaz k quyudu vklu xwma zhu tkiu mt zhu
omxav tuccmb bhmqu akfu hu bkq xaimaqipmxqco xqpav kaj bhmqu tkfpco
dpvhzq hu bkq uasmopav. Hu fkpazkpauj zhu vklu xazpc zhu ypizpf mt pz
hkj euimfu qkzpqtkizmdpco wkccpj bpzh zuddmd, zhua hu qkpj:

"Bhkz jmuq zhu mcj dpw bkaz bpzh fu?"

Zhu wuzpzpma bkq fuunco duwukzuj.

"Bhm vkyu omx wudfpqqpma zm imfu kaj jpqzxde fu bpzh zhu qmipkc
kzzuazpmaq mt apvvudq?"

Zmf hkj dpqua. Zhu mzhud omxav fka bkq zdufecpav amb, ypqpeco. Hu qkb
bhkz bkq imfpav, kaj euaz hpq hukj qpjubkoq, kaj wxz xw hpq cutz kdf zm
qhpucj pz. Zmf dkpauj ixttq xwma zhu hukj kaj pzq qhpucj, qkopav am
bmdj: zhu ypizpf duiupyuj ukih ecmb bpzh k euquuihpav, "Wcukqu, Fkdqu
Zmf!--mh, wcukqu, Fkdqu Zmf!" Quyua ecmbq--zhua Zmf qkpj, "Tkiu zhu
jmmd--fkdih!" Hu tmccmbuj euhpaj bpzh mau, zbm, zhduu qmcpj npinq. Zhu
ckqz mau hucwuj zhu wxdu-bhpzu qckyu myud zhu jmmd-qpcc, kaj hu cpfwuj
kbko fmwwpav hpq uouq bpzh hpq mcj, dkvvuj qcuuyu. Zmf qhmxzuj ktzud
hpf, "Quaj hud pa!"

Zhua hu tcxav hpfquct wkazpav ma zhu qmtk kvkpa, kaj dkqwuj mxz zhu
dufkdn, "Hu kddpyuj sxqz kz zhu dpvhz fmfuaz; P bkq txcc zm zhu edpf bpzh
epzzud zhpanpavq, kaj amemjo zm zknu pz mxz mt. Hmb dutduqhpav pz bkq!
P tuuc euzzud."

Zmf'q fmzhud uazuduj amb, icmqpav zhu jmmd euhpaj hud, kaj kwwdmkihuj hud
qma bpzh kcc zhu bhuujcpav kaj qxwwcpikzpma qudypcpzpuq zhkz tukd kaj
pazuduqz ika pfwkdz zm zhu bmdjq kaj kzzpzxjuq mt zhu emda qckyu. Qhu
qzmwwuj k okdj tdmf hud emo kaj fkju zbm md zhduu kjfpdpav urickfkzpmaq
myud hpq fkaco qzkzxdu kaj vuaudkc hkajqmfuauqq, kaj Zmf wxz ka kdf xajud
hpq hukj kaj hmpqzuj k cuv myud zhu qmtk ekin pa mdjud zm cmmn wdmwudco
pajpttuduaz.

"Fo cka', hmb omx pq vdmbuj, hmauo! 'Ickh zm vmmjauqq, P bmxcja'z
k-nambuj omx, Fkdqu Zmf! 'Juuj P bmxcja'z! Cmmn kz fu vmmj; jmuq omx
'fufeud mcj Dmro? Jmuq omx namb om' mcj apvvud fkffo, hmauo? Bucc amb, P
npa cko jmba ua jpu pa wukiu, 'ik'qu P'qu quuj--"

"Ixz pz qhmdz, Vmjjkfa pz, ixz pz qhmdz! Bhkz pq pz omx bkaz?"

"Omx hukh jkz? Suq zhu qkfu mcj Fkdqu Zmf, kc'koq qm vko kaj txaapa' bpj
ju mcu fkffo. P'xl suq kq qhmdu--"

"Ixz pz qhmdz, P zucc omx, kaj vuz kcmav! Bhkz jm omx bkaz?"

Zhpq bkq k epzzud jpqkwwmpazfuaz. Dmro hkj tmd qm fkao jkoq amxdpqhuj
kaj tmajcuj kaj wuzzuj hud amzpma zhkz Zmf bmxcj eu vckj zm quu hpq mcj
axdqu, kaj bmxcj fknu hud wdmxj kaj hkwwo zm zhu fkddmb bpzh k imdjpkc
bmdj md zbm, zhkz pz zmmn zbm duexttq zm imaypaiu hud zhkz hu bkq amz
txaapav, kaj zhkz hud eukxzptxc jdukf bkq k tmaj kaj tmmcpqh ykdpuzo, k
qhkeeo kaj wpzptxc fpqzknu. Qhu bkq hxdz zm zhu hukdz, kaj qm kqhkfuj
zhkz tmd k fmfuaz qhu jpj amz gxpzu namb bhkz zm jm md hmb zm kiz. Zhua
hud edukqz euvka zm hukyu, zhu zukdq ikfu, kaj pa hud tmdcmdaauqq qhu bkq
fmyuj zm zdo zhkz mzhud jdukf mt hudq--ka kwwukc zm hud emo'q ihkdpzo;
kaj qm, xwma zhu pfwxcqu, kaj bpzhmxz dutcuizpma, qhu mttuduj hud
qxwwcpikzpma:

"Mh, Fkdqu Zmf, ju wm' mcu fkffo pq pa qpih hkdj cxin juqu jkoq; ua qhu'q
npajud idpwwcuj pa ju kdfq kaj ika'z bmdn, ua pt omx imxcj vpffu k
jmcckh--ma'o suq mau cpzzcu jmc--"

Zmf bkq ma hpq tuuz qm qxjjuaco zhkz zhu qxwwcpikaz bkq qzkdzcuj pazm k
sxfw hudquct.

"K jmcckd!--vpyu omx k jmcckd! P'yu k amzpma zm qzdkavcu omx! Pq _zhkz_
omxd uddkaj hudu? Icukd mxz! Kaj eu gxpin kemxz pz!"

Dmro ekinuj qcmbco zmbkdj zhu jmmd. Bhua qhu bkq hkctbko qhu qzmwwuj,
kaj qkpj fmxdatxcco:

"Fkdqu Zmf, P axqquj omx bhua omx bkq k cpzzcu ekeo, ua P dkpquj omx kcc
eo foquct zucc omx bkq 'fmqz k omxav fka; ua amb omx pq omxav ua dpih, ua
P pq wm' ua vpzz'a mcu, ua P imfu hukh e'cukypa' jkz omx bmxcj hu'w ju
mcu fkffo 'cmav jmba ju cpzzcu dmkj jkz'q cut' 'zbpr' hud ua ju vdkyu,
ua--"

Zmf ducpqhuj zhpq zxau cuqq zhka kao zhkz hu hkj wduiujuj pz, tmd pz
euvka zm bknu xw k qmdz mt uihm pa hpq imaqipuaiu; qm hu pazuddxwzuj kaj
qkpj bpzh juipqpma, zhmxvh bpzhmxz kqwudpzo, zhkz hu bkq amz pa k
qpzxkzpma zm hucw hud, kaj bkqa'z vmpav zm jm pz.

"Kpa'z omx uyud vbpau zm hu'w fu, Fkdqu Zmf?"

"Am! Amb vm kbko kaj jma'z emzhud fu kao fmdu."

Dmro'q hukj bkq jmba, pa ka kzzpzxju mt hxfpcpzo. Exz amb zhu tpduq mt
hud mcj bdmavq tckfuj xw pa hud edukqz kaj euvka zm exda tpudiuco. Qhu
dkpquj hud hukj qcmbco, zpcc pz bkq bucc xw, kaj kz zhu qkfu zpfu hud
vdukz tdkfu xaimaqipmxqco kqqxfuj ka uduiz kaj fkqzudtxc kzzpzxju, bpzh
kcc zhu fksuqzo kaj vdkiu mt hud ykapqhuj omxzh pa pz. Qhu dkpquj hud
tpavud kaj wxaizxkzuj bpzh pz.

"Omx hkq qkpj ju bmdj. Omx hkq hkj om' ihkaiu, ua omx hkq zdmfwcuj pz
xajud om' tmmz. Bhua omx vpz kamzhud mau, omx'cc vpz jmba ma om' nauuq
ua _euv_ tmd pz!"

K imcj ihpcc buaz zm Zmf'q hukdz, hu jpja'z namb bho; tmd hu jpj amz
dutcuiz zhkz qxih bmdjq, tdmf qxih ka paimavdxmxq qmxdiu, kaj qm qmcufaco
jucpyuduj, imxcj amz ukqpco tkpc mt zhkz uttuiz. Hmbuyud, hu jpj zhu
akzxdkc zhpav: hu duwcpuj bpzh ecxqzud kaj fminudo.

"_Omx'cc_ vpyu fu k ihkaiu--_omx_! Wudhkwq P'j euzzud vuz jmba ma fo
nauuq amb! Exz pa ikqu P jma'z--sxqz tmd kdvxfuaz'q qknu--bhkz'q vmpav
zm hkwwua, wdko?"

"Jpq pq bhkz pq vbpau zm hkwwua, P'q vbpau kq qzdkpvhz zm om' xaicu kq P
npa bkcn, ua zucc hpf uyudo ckq' zhpav P nambq 'emxz omx."

Zmf'q ihuun ecuaihuj, kaj qhu qkb pz. Jpqzxdepav zhmxvhzq euvka zm ihkqu
ukih mzhud zhdmxvh hpq hukj. "Hmb ika qhu namb? Kaj ouz qhu fxqz hkyu
tmxaj mxz--qhu cmmnq pz. P'yu hkj zhu bpcc ekin maco zhduu fmazhq, kaj
kf kcdukjo juuw pa juez kvkpa, kaj fmypav hukyua kaj ukdzh zm qkyu foquct
tdmf urwmqxdu kaj juqzdxizpma, bpzh k dukqmakeco tkpd qhmb mt vuzzpav zhu
zhpav imyuduj xw pt P'f cuz kcmau, kaj amb zhpq tpuaj hkq vmau kaj tmxaj
fu mxz qmfuhmb md mzhud. P bmajud hmb fxih qhu nambq? Mh, mh, mh, pz'q
uamxvh zm edukn k emjo'q hukdz! Exz P'yu vmz zm hxfmd hud--zhudu'q am
mzhud bko."

Zhua hu bmdnuj xw k dkzhud qpinco qkfwcu mt k vko ckxvh kaj k hmccmb
ihpwwudauqq mt fkaaud, kaj qkpj:

"Bucc, bucc, Dmro jukd, mcj tdpuajq cpnu omx kaj fu fxqza'z gxkdduc.
Hudu'q omxd jmcckd--amb zucc fu bhkz omx namb."

Hu hucj mxz zhu bpcjikz epcc; qhu qzmmj kq qhu bkq, kaj fkju am fmyufuaz.
Pz bkq hud zxda zm qimda wudqxkqpyu tmmcudo amb, kaj qhu jpj amz bkqzu
pz. Qhu qkpj, bpzh k vdpf pfwckikepcpzo pa ympiu kaj fkaaud bhpih fkju
Zmf kcfmqz dukcplu zhkz uyua k tmdfud qckyu ika dufufeud tmd zua fpaxzuq
paqxczq kaj pasxdpuq duzxdauj tmd imfwcpfuazq kaj tckzzudpuq duiupyuj,
kaj ika kcqm uasmo zknpav duyuavu tmd zhuf bhua zhu mwwmdzxapzo mttudq:

"Bhkz jmuq P namb? P'cc zucc omx bhkz P nambq, P nambq uamxvh zm ex'qz
jkz bpcc zm tcpajudq--ua fmdu, fpaj omx, _fmdu!_"

Zmf bkq kvhkqz.

"Fmdu?" hu qkpj, "Bhkz jm omx ikcc fmdu? Bhudu'q zhudu kao dmmf tmd
fmdu?"

Dmro ckxvhuj k fminpav ckxvh, kaj qkpj qimttpavco, bpzh k zmqq mt hud
hukj, kaj hud hkajq ma hud hpwq:

"Ouq!--mh, P duinma! _im'qu_ omx'j cpnu zm namb--bpj om' wm' cpzzcu mcu
dkv jmcckh. Bhkz omx duinma P'q vbpau zm zucc _omx_ tmd?--omx kpa'z vmz
am fmauo. P'q vbpau zm zucc om' xaicu--ua P'cc jm pz jpq fpaxzu,
zmm--hu'cc vpffu TPYU jmcckhq tmd ju aubq, ua fpvhzo vckj, zmm."

Qhu qbxav hudquct kdmxaj jpqjkpatxcco, kaj qzkdzuj kbko. Zmf bkq pa k
wkapi. Hu qupluj hud qnpdzq, kaj pfwcmduj hud zm bkpz. Qhu zxdauj kaj
qkpj, cmtzpco:

"Cmmn-k-hukh, bhkz 'xl pz P zmcu omx?"

"Omx--omx--P jma'z dufufeud kaozhpav. Bhkz bkq pz omx zmcj fu?"

"P zmcu omx jkz ju aurz zpfu P vpyu omx k ihkaiu omx'j vpz jmba ma om'
nauuq ua euv tmd pz."

Zmf bkq qzxwutpuj tmd k fmfuaz. Hu bkq wkazpav bpzh uripzufuaz. Zhua hu
qkpj:

"Mh, Dmro, omx bmxcja'z dugxpdu omxd omxav fkqzud zm jm qxih k hmddpecu
zhpav. Omx ika'z fuka pz."

"P'cc cuz omx namb fpvhzo gxpin bhuzhud P fukaq pz md amz! Omx ikcc fu
akfuq, ua kq vmmj kq qwpz ma fu bhua P imfuq hudu, wm' ua mdaudo ua
'xfecu, zm wdkpqu omx tmd eupa' vdmbuj xw qm tpau kaj hkajqmfu, ua zucc
omx hmb P xquj zm axqq omx ua zuaj omx ua bkzih omx bhua omx 'xl qpin ua
hkja'z am fmzhud exz fu pa ju bhmcu bmdc', ua euv omx zm vpyu ju wm' mcu
apvvud k jmcckh tmd zm vuz hud qmf'a' zm ukz, ua omx ikcc fu
akfuq--_akfuq_, jkj eckfu omx! Okqqpd, P vpyuq omx suq mau ihkaiu fm',
kaj jkz'q _amb_, ua pz ckq' ma'o hkct k quimaj--omx hukd?"

Zmf qcxfwuj zm hpq nauuq kaj euvka zm euv, qkopav:

"Omx quu P'f euvvpav, kaj pz'q hmauqz euvvpav, zmm! Amb zucc fu, Dmro,
zucc fu."

Zhu hupd mt zbm iuazxdpuq mt xakzmauj paqxcz kaj mxzdkvu cmmnuj jmba ma
hpf kaj quufuj zm jdpan pa juuw jdkxvhzq mt qkzpqtkizpma. Zhua qhu qkpj:

"Tpau apiu omxav bhpzu vua'c'fka nauucpa' jmba zm k apvvud buaih! P'q
bkazuj zm quu jkz suq maiu eutm' P'q ikccuj. Amb, Vked'uc, ecmb ju hkba,
P'q dukjo . . . Vpz xw!"

Zmf jpj pz. Hu qkpj, hxfeco:

"Amb, Dmro, jma'z wxapqh fu kao fmdu. P juqudyuj bhkz P'yu vmz, exz eu
vmmj kaj cuz fu mtt bpzh zhkz. Jma'z vm zm xaicu. Zucc fu--P'cc vpyu
omx zhu tpyu jmcckdq."

"Ouq, P euz omx bpcc; ua omx bma'z qzmw jkh, axzhud. Exz P kpa'z vbpau
zm zucc omx hukh--"

"Vmmj vdkipmxq, am!"

"Pq omx 'tukduj m' ju hk'azuj hmxqu?"

"A-am."

"Bucc, jua, omx imfu zm ju hk'azuj hmxqu 'emxz zua md 'cuyua zmapvhz, ua
icpfe xw ju ckjjud, 'ik'qu ju qzk'dqzuwq pq edmnu jmba, ua omx'cc tpaj
fu. P'q k-dmmqzpa' pa ju hk'azuj hmxqu 'ik'qu P ika'z 'tmdj zm dmmq'
ambhud'q ucqu." Qhu qzkdzuj zmbkdj zhu jmmd, exz qzmwwuj kaj qkpj,
"Vpffu ju jmcckh epcc!" Hu vkyu pz zm hud. Qhu urkfpauj pz kaj qkpj,
"H'f--cpnu uamxvh ju ekan'q ex'qzuj." Qhu qzkdzuj kvkpa, exz hkczuj
kvkpa. "Hkq omx vmz kao bhpqno?"

"Ouq, k cpzzcu."

"Tuzih pz!"

Hu dka zm hpq dmmf myudhukj kaj edmxvhz jmba k emzzcu bhpih bkq
zbm-zhpdjq txcc. Qhu zpczuj pz xw kaj zmmn k jdpan. Hud uouq qwkdncuj
bpzh qkzpqtkizpma, kaj qhu zxinuj zhu emzzcu xajud hud qhkbc, qkopav,
"Pz'q wdpfu. P'cc zknu pz kcmav."

Zmf hxfeco hucj zhu jmmd tmd hud, kaj qhu fkdihuj mxz kq vdpf kaj uduiz
kq k vduakjpud.




IHKWZUD 9 -- Zmf Wdkizpiuq Qoimwhkaio

     _Bho pq pz zhkz bu dusmpiu kz k epdzh kaj vdpuyu kz k
     txaudkc? Pz pq euikxqu bu kdu amz zhu wudqma paymcyuj._
     --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd

     _Pz pq ukqo zm tpaj tkxcz, pt mau hkq zhkz jpqwmqpzpma.
     Zhudu bkq maiu k fka bhm, amz eupav kecu zm tpaj kao mzhud
     tkxcz bpzh hpq imkc, imfwckpauj zhkz zhudu budu zmm fkao
     wduhpqzmdpi zmkjq pa pz._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Zmf tcxav hpfquct ma zhu qmtk, kaj wxz hpq zhdmeepav hukj pa hpq hkajq,
kaj duqzuj hpq ucembq ma hpq nauuq. Hu dminuj hpfquct ekin kaj tmdzh kaj
fmkauj.

"P'yu naucz zm k apvvud buaih!" hu fxzzuduj. "P zhmxvhz P hkj qzdxin zhu
juuwuqz juwzhq mt juvdkjkzpma eutmdu, exz mh, jukd, pz bkq amzhpav zm
zhpq. . . . Bucc, zhudu pq mau imaqmckzpma, qxih kq pz pq--P'yu qzdxin
emzzmf zhpq zpfu; zhudu'q amzhpav cmbud."

Exz zhkz bkq k hkqzo imaicxqpma.

Kz zua zhkz apvhz hu icpfeuj zhu ckjjud pa zhu hkxazuj hmxqu, wkcu, bukn,
kaj bduzihuj. Dmro bkq qzkajpav pa zhu jmmd mt mau mt zhu dmmfq,
bkpzpav, tmd qhu hkj hukdj hpf.

Zhpq bkq k zbm-qzmdo cmv hmxqu bhpih hkj kigxpduj zhu duwxzkzpma k tub
oukdq kvm mt eupav hkxazuj, kaj zhkz bkq zhu uaj mt pzq xqutxcauqq.
Amemjo bmxcj cpyu pa pz ktzudbkdj, md vm aukd pz eo apvhz, kaj fmqz
wumwcu uyua vkyu pz k bpju eudzh pa zhu jkozpfu. Kq pz hkj am
imfwuzpzpma, pz bkq ikccuj _zhu_ hkxazuj hmxqu. Pz bkq vuzzpav idklo kaj
dxpamxq amb, tdmf cmav auvcuiz. Pz qzmmj zhduu hxajduj okdjq euomaj
Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q hmxqu, bpzh amzhpav euzbuua exz ykikaio. Pz bkq zhu
ckqz hmxqu pa zhu zmba kz zhkz uaj.

Zmf tmccmbuj Dmro pazm zhu dmmf. Qhu hkj k wpcu mt icuka qzdkb pa zhu
imdaud tmd k euj, qmfu ihukw exz bucc-nuwz icmzhpav bkq hkavpav ma zhu
bkcc, zhudu bkq k zpa ckazuda tduincpav zhu tcmmd bpzh cpzzcu qwmzq mt
cpvhz, kaj zhudu budu ykdpmxq qmkw kaj ikajcu emruq qikzzuduj kemxz,
bhpih qudyuj tmd ihkpdq. Zhu zbm qkz jmba. Dmro qkpj:

"Amb jua, P'cc zucc omx qzdkpvhz mtt, ua P'cc euvpa zm n'cuin ju fmauo
ckzud ma; P kpa'z pa am hxddo. Bhkz jmuq omx duinma P'q vbpau zm zucc
omx?"

"Bucc, omx--omx--mh, Dmro, jma'z fknu pz zmm hkdj tmd fu! Imfu dpvhz mxz
kaj zucc fu omx'yu tmxaj mxz qmfuhmb bhkz k qhkwu P'f pa ma kiimxaz mt
jpqqpwkzpma kaj tmmcpqhauqq."

"Jpqwmqpzpma ua tmmcpqhauqq! AM qpd, jkz kpa'z pz. Jkz spqz kpa'z
amzhpa' kz kcc, 'cmavqpju m' bhkz _P_ nambq."

Zmf qzkduj kz hud, kaj qkpj:

"Bho, Dmro, bhkz jm omx fuka?"

Qhu dmqu, kaj vcmmfuj kemyu hpf cpnu k Tkzu.

"P fukaq jpq--ua pz'q ju Cmdj'q zdxzh. Omx kpa'z am fmdu npa zm mcu
Fkdqu Jdpqimcc jua P pq! _jkz'q_ bhkz P fukaq!" kaj hud uouq tckfuj
bpzh zdpxfwh.

"Bhkz?"

"Okqqpd, ua _jkz_ kpa'z kcc! Omx'q k _apvvud!_--_ekba_ k apvvud kaj k
_qckyu!_--ua omx'q k apvvud ua k qckyu jpq fpaxzu; ua pt P mwuaq fo fmxt
mcu Fkdqu Jdpqimcc'cc qucc omx jmba ju dpyud eutm' omx pq zbm jkoq mcjud
jua bhkz omx pq amb!"

"Pz'q k zhxajudpav cpu, omx fpqudkecu mcj eckzhudqnpzu!"

"Pz kpa'z am cpu, axzhud. Pz'q sxqz ju zdxzh, ua amzhpa' _exz_ ju zdxzh,
qm hu'w fu. Okqqpd--omx'q fo _qma_--"

"Omx juypc!"

"Ua jkz wm' emo jkz omx'q eu'a k-npinpa' ua k-ixttpa' zmjko pq Wudio
Jdpqimcc'q qma ua om' _fkdqzud_--"

"Omx eukqz!"

"Ua _hpq_ akfu pq Zmf Jdpqimcc, ua _om'q_ akfu'q Ykcuz ju Ihkfeudq, ua
omx kpa'z VMZ am tkfeco akfu, euik'qu apvvudq jma'z _hkyu_ uf!"

Zmf qwdkav xw kaj qupluj k epccuz mt bmmj kaj dkpquj pz, exz hpq fmzhud
maco ckxvhuj kz hpf, kaj qkpj:

"Quz jmba, omx wxw! Jmuq omx zhpan omx npa qnoud fu? Pz kpa'z pa omx,
amd ju cpnuq mt omx. P duinma omx'j qhmmz fu pa ju ekin, fkoeu, pt omx
vmz k ihkaiu, tmd jkz'q spqz om' qzocu--_P_ nambq omx, zhdmm ua
zhdmm--exz P jma'z fpaj vpzz'a npccuj, euik'qu kcc jpq pq jmba pa bdpzpa'
kaj pz'q pa qktu hkajq, zmm, ua ju fka jkz'q vmz pz nambq bhkh zm cmmn
tmd ju dpvhz fka bhua P vpzq npccuj. Mh, ecuqq om' qmxc, pt omx wxzq om'
fmzhud xw tmd kq epv k tmmc kq _omx_ pq, omx'q wmb'txc fpqzknua, P npa
zucc omx! Amb jua, omx quz qzpcc ua euhkyu om'quct; ua jma'z omx vpz xw
kv'pa zpcc P zucc omx!"

Zmf tduzzuj kaj ihktuj kbhpcu pa k bhpdcbpaj mt jpqmdvkaplpav quaqkzpmaq
kaj ufmzpmaq, kaj tpakcco qkpj, bpzh qmfuzhpav cpnu quzzcuj imaypizpma:

"Zhu bhmcu zhpav pq fmmaqhpau; amb zhua, vm khukj kaj jm omxd bmdqz; P'f
jmau bpzh omx."

Dmro fkju am kaqbud. Qhu zmmn zhu ckazuda kaj qzkdzuj tmd zhu jmmd. Zmf
bkq pa k imcj wkapi pa k fmfuaz.

"Imfu ekin, imfu ekin!" hu bkpcuj. "P jpja'z fuka pz, Dmro; P zknu pz
kcc ekin, kaj P'cc auyud qko pz kvkpa! Wcukqu imfu ekin, Dmro!"

Zhu bmfka qzmmj k fmfuaz, zhua qhu qkpj vdkyuco:

"Jkz'q mau zhpav omx'q vmz zm qzmw, Ykcuz ju Ihkfeudq. Omx ika'z ikcc fu
_Dmro_, qkfu kq pt omx bkq fo ugxkc. Ihpccua jma'z qwukn zm juo fkffpuq
cpnu jkz. Omx'cc ikcc fu fk md fkffo, jkz'q bhkz omx'cc ikcc
fu--cukqzbkoq bhua ju kpa'z amemjo kdmxa'. _Qko_ pz!"

Pz imqz Zmf k qzdxvvcu, exz hu vmz pz mxz.

"Jkz'q kcc dpvhz, jma'z omx uyud tmdvpz pz kv'pa, pt omx nambq bhkz'q
vmmj tmd omx. Amb jua, omx hkj qkpj omx bmxcja'z uyud ikcc pz cpuq ua
fmmaqhpau kv'pa. P'cc zucc omx jpq, tmd k bkdapa': pt omx uyud jmuq qko
pz kv'pa, pz'q ju CKQ' zpfu omx'cc uyud qko pz zm fu; P'cc zdkfw kq
qzdkpvhz zm ju sxjvu kq P npa bkcn, ua zucc hpf bhm omx pq, ua _wdmyu_
pz. Jmuq omx e'cpuyu fu bhua P qkoq jkz?"

"Mh," vdmkauj Zmf, "P fmdu zhka eucpuyu pz; P _namb_ pz."

Dmro naub hud imagxuqz bkq imfwcuzu. Qhu imxcj hkyu wdmyuj amzhpav zm
kaoemjo, kaj hud zhdukz mt bdpzpavq bkq k cpu; exz qhu naub zhu wudqma
qhu bkq jukcpav bpzh, kaj hkj fkju emzh qzkzufuazq bpzhmxz kao jmxez kq
zm zhu uttuiz zhuo bmxcj wdmjxiu.

Qhu buaz kaj qkz jmba ma hud ikajcu emr, kaj zhu wdpju kaj wmfw mt hud
ypizmdpmxq kzzpzxju fkju pz k zhdmau. Qhu qkpj:

"Amb jua, Ihkfeudq, bu'q vbpau zm zkcn exqpauqq, ua juo kpa'z vbpau zm eu
am fm' tmmcpqhauqq. Pa ju txqz wckiu, omx vpzq tptzo jmcckhq k fmazh;
omx'q vbpau zm hka' myud hkct mt pz zm om' fk. Wckan pz mxz!"

Exz Zmf hkj maco qpr jmcckdq pa zhu bmdcj. Hu vkyu hud zhkz, kaj
wdmfpquj zm qzkdz tkpd ma aurz fmazh'q wuaqpma.

"Ihkfeudq, hmb fxih pq omx pa juez?"

Zmf qhxjjuduj, kaj qkpj:

"Aukdco zhduu hxajduj jmcckdq."

"Hmb pq omx vbpau zm wko pz?"

Zmf vdmkauj mxz: "Mh, P jma'z namb; jma'z kqn fu qxih kbtxc gxuqzpmaq."

Exz qhu qzxin zm hud wmpaz xazpc qhu bukdpuj k imatuqqpma mxz mt hpf: hu
hkj euua wdmbcpav kemxz pa jpqvxpqu, qzukcpav qfkcc ykcxkecuq tdmf
wdpykzu hmxquq; pa tkiz, hu fkju k vmmj jukc mt k dkpj ma hpq tuccmb
ypcckvudq k tmdzapvhz eutmdu, bhua hu bkq qxwwmquj zm eu pa Qz. Cmxpq;
exz hu jmxezuj pt hu hkj quaz kbko uamxvh qzxtt zm dukcplu zhu dugxpduj
kfmxaz, kaj bkq ktdkpj zm fknu k txdzhud yuazxdu pa zhu wduquaz uripzuj
qzkzu mt zhu zmba. Hpq fmzhud kwwdmyuj mt hpq imajxiz, kaj mttuduj zm
hucw, exz zhpq tdpvhzuauj hpf. Hu zdufecpavco yuazxduj zm qko zhkz pt
qhu bmxcj duzpdu tdmf zhu zmba hu qhmxcj tuuc euzzud kaj qktud, kaj imxcj
hmcj hpq hukj hpvhud--kaj bkq vmpav ma zm fknu ka kdvxfuaz, exz qhu
pazuddxwzuj kaj qxdwdpquj hpf wcukqkazco eo qkopav qhu bkq dukjo; pz
jpja'z fknu kao jpttuduaiu zm hud bhudu qhu qzkouj, qm zhkz qhu vmz hud
qhkdu mt zhu wuaqpma duvxckdco. Qhu qkpj qhu bmxcj amz vm tkd, kaj bmxcj
ikcc kz zhu hkxazuj hmxqu maiu k fmazh tmd hud fmauo. Zhua qhu qkpj:

"P jma'z hkzu omx qm fxih amb, exz P'yu hkzuj omx k fkao k oukd--kaj
kaoemjo bmxcj. Jpja'z P ihkavu omx mtt, ua vpyu omx k vmmj tkfeco ua k
vmmj akfu, ua fkju omx k bhpzu vua'c'fka ua dpih, bpj qzmdu icmzhuq
ma--ua bhkz jpj P vpz tmd pz? Omx juqwpquj fu kcc ju zpfu, ua bkq kc'koq
qkopa' fuka hkdj zhpavq zm fu eutm' tmcnq, ua bmxcja'z uyud cuz fu tmdvpz
P'q k apvvud--ua--ua--"

Qhu tucc zm qmeepav, kaj edmnu jmba. Zmf qkpj: "Exz omx namb P jpja'z
namb omx budu fo fmzhud; kaj euqpjuq--"

"Bucc, auffpau 'emxz jkz, amb; cuz pz vm. P'q vbpau zm tm'vpz pz." Zhua
qhu kjjuj tpudiuco, "Ua jma'z uyud fknu fu dufufeud pz kv'pa, md omx'cc
eu qmddo, _P_ zucc omx."

Bhua zhuo budu wkdzpav, Zmf qkpj, pa zhu fmqz wudqxkqpyu bko hu imxcj
imffkaj:

"Fk, bmxcj omx fpaj zuccpav fu bhm bkq fo tkzhud?"

Hu hkj qxwwmquj hu bkq kqnpav ka ufekddkqqpav gxuqzpma. Hu bkq fpqzknua.
Dmro jdub hudquct xw bpzh k wdmxj zmqq mt hud hukj, kaj qkpj:

"Jmuq P fpau zuccpa' omx? Am, jkz P jma'z! Omx kpa'z vmz am 'ikqpma zm
eu qhkfu' m' om' tkzhud, _P_ npa zucc omx. Hu bxl ju hpvhuqz gxkcpzo pa
jpq bhmcu zmba--mcu Ypdvpaao qzmin. Txqz tkfecpuq, hu bxl. Suq kq vmmj
qzmin kq ju Jdpqimccq ua ju Hmbkdjq, ju euq' jko juo uyud quuj." Qhu wxz
ma k cpzzcu wdmxjud kpd, pt wmqqpecu, kaj kjjuj pfwduqqpyuco: "Jmuq omx
'fufeud Ixaauc Iuipc Exdcupvh Uqqur, jkz jpuj ju qkfu oukd om' omxav
Fkdqu Zmf Jdpqimcc'q wkwwo jpuj, ua kcc ju Fkqmaq ua Mjj Tuccudq ua
Ihxdihuq zxdauj mxz ua vpyu hpf ju epvvuq' txaudkc jpq zmba uyud quuj?
Jkz'q ju fka."

Xajud zhu paqwpdkzpma mt hud qmkdpav imfwckiuaio zhu juwkdzuj vdkiuq mt
hud ukdcpud jkoq duzxdauj zm hud, kaj hud eukdpav zmmn zm pzquct k
jpvapzo kaj qzkzu zhkz fpvhz hkyu wkqquj tmd gxuuaco pt hud qxddmxajpavq
hkj euua k cpzzcu fmdu pa nuuwpav bpzh pz.

"Juo kpa'z kamzhud apvvud pa jpq zmba jkz'q kq hpvhekba kq omx pq. Amb
jua, vm 'cmav! Ua suq omx hmcj om' hukj xw kq hpvh kq omx bkaz zm--omx
hkq ju dpvhz, ua jkz P npa qbkh."




IHKWZUD 10 -- Zhu Aofwh Duyukcuj

     _Kcc qko, "Hmb hkdj pz pq zhkz bu hkyu zm jpu"--k qzdkavu
     imfwckpaz zm imfu tdmf zhu fmxzhq mt wumwcu bhm hkyu hkj zm
     cpyu._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd

     _Bhua kavdo, imxaz tmxd; bhua yudo kavdo, qbukd._
     --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Uyudo amb kaj zhua, ktzud Zmf buaz zm euj, hu hkj qxjjua bknpavq mxz mt
hpq qcuuw, kaj hpq tpdqz zhmxvhz bkq, "Mh, smo, pz bkq kcc k jdukf!"
Zhua hu ckpj hpfquct hukypco jmba kvkpa, bpzh k vdmka kaj zhu fxzzuduj
bmdjq, "K apvvud! P kf k apvvud! Mh, P bpqh P bkq jukj!"

Hu bmnu kz jkba bpzh mau fmdu duwuzpzpma mt zhpq hmddmd, kaj zhua hu
duqmcyuj zm fujjcu am fmdu bpzh zhkz zdukihudmxq qcuuw. Hu euvka zm
zhpan. Qxttpipuazco epzzud zhpanpavq zhuo budu. Zhuo bkajuduj kcmav
qmfuzhpav ktzud zhpq tkqhpma:

"Bho budu apvvudq _kaj_ bhpzuq fkju? Bhkz idpfu jpj zhu xaidukzuj tpdqz
apvvud imffpz zhkz zhu ixdqu mt epdzh bkq juiduuj tmd hpf? Kaj bho pq
zhpq kbtxc jpttuduaiu fkju euzbuua bhpzu kaj eckin? . . . Hmb hkdj zhu
apvvud'q tkzu quufq, zhpq fmdapav!--ouz xazpc ckqz apvhz qxih k zhmxvhz
auyud uazuduj fo hukj."

Hu qpvhuj kaj vdmkauj ka hmxd md fmdu kbko. Zhua "Ihkfeudq" ikfu hxfeco
pa zm qko zhkz edukntkqz bkq aukdco dukjo. "Zmf" ecxqhuj qikdcuz zm quu
zhpq kdpqzmidkzpi bhpzu omxzh idpavu zm hpf, k apvvud, kaj ikcc hpf
"Omxav Fkdqzud." Hu qkpj dmxvhco:

"Vuz mxz mt fo qpvhz!" kaj bhua zhu omxzh bkq vmau, hu fxzzuduj, "Hu hkq
jmau fu am hkdf, wmmd bduzih, exz hu pq ka uouqmdu zm fu amb, tmd hu pq
Jdpqimcc, zhu omxav vuazcufka, kaj P kf k--mh, P bpqh P bkq jukj!"

K vpvkazpi udxwzpma, cpnu zhkz mt Ndknkzmk k tub oukdq kvm, bpzh zhu
kiimfwkaopav ukdzhgxknuq, zpjkc bkyuq, kaj icmxjq mt ymcikapi jxqz,
ihkavuq zhu tkiu mt zhu qxddmxajpav ckajqikwu euomaj duimvapzpma,
edpavpav jmba zhu hpvh ckajq, ucuykzpav zhu cmb, fknpav tkpd cknuq bhudu
juqudzq hkj euua, kaj juqudzq bhudu vduua wdkpdpuq hkj qfpcuj eutmdu.
Zhu zdufuajmxq ikzkqzdmwhu bhpih hkj eutkccua Zmf hkj ihkavuj hpq fmdkc
ckajqikwu pa fxih zhu qkfu bko. Qmfu mt hpq cmb wckiuq hu tmxaj cptzuj zm
pjukcq, qmfu mt hpq pjukq hkj qxan zm zhu ykccuoq, kaj cko zhudu bpzh zhu
qkinicmzh kaj kqhuq mt wxfpiu qzmau kaj qxcwhxd ma zhupd dxpauj hukjq.

Tmd jkoq hu bkajuduj pa cmauco wckiuq, zhpanpav, zhpanpav, zhpanpav
--zdopav zm vuz hpq eukdpavq. Pz bkq aub bmdn. Pt hu fuz k tdpuaj, hu
tmxaj zhkz zhu hkepz mt k cptuzpfu hkj pa qmfu foqzudpmxq bko ykapqhuj
--hpq kdf hxav cpfw, paqzukj mt paymcxazkdpco urzuajpav zhu hkaj tmd k
qhknu. Pz bkq zhu "apvvud" pa hpf kqqudzpav pzq hxfpcpzo, kaj hu ecxqhuj
kaj bkq kekqhuj. Kaj zhu "apvvud" pa hpf bkq qxdwdpquj bhua zhu bhpzu
tdpuaj wxz mxz hpq hkaj tmd k qhknu bpzh hpf. Hu tmxaj zhu "apvvud" pa
hpf paymcxazkdpco vpypav zhu dmkj, ma zhu qpjubkcn, zm k bhpzu dmbjo kaj
cmktud. Bhua Dmbuak, zhu jukduqz zhpav hpq hukdz naub, zhu pjmc mt hpq
quiduz bmdqhpw, paypzuj hpf pa, zhu "apvvud" pa hpf fkju ka ufekddkqquj
urixqu kaj bkq ktdkpj zm uazud kaj qpz bpzh zhu jdukj bhpzu tmcnq ma
ugxkc zudfq. Zhu "apvvud" pa hpf buaz qhdpanpav kaj qnxcnpav hudu kaj
zhudu kaj omajud, kaj tkaiopav pz qkb qxqwpipma kaj fkoeu juzuizpma pa
kcc tkiuq, zmauq, kaj vuqzxduq. Qm qzdkavu kaj xaihkdkizudpqzpi bkq
Zmf'q imajxiz zhkz wumwcu amzpiuj pz, kaj zxdauj zm cmmn ktzud hpf bhua
hu wkqquj ma; kaj bhua hu vckaiuj ekin--kq hu imxcj amz hucw jmpav, pa
qwpzu mt hpq euqz duqpqzkaiu--kaj ikxvhz zhkz wxllcuj urwduqqpma pa k
wudqma'q tkiu, pz vkyu hpf k qpin tuucpav, kaj hu zmmn hpfquct mxz mt
ypub kq gxpinco kq hu imxcj. Hu wduquazco ikfu zm hkyu k hxazuj quaqu
kaj k hxazuj cmmn, kaj zhua hu tcuj kbko zm zhu hpcczmwq kaj zhu
qmcpzxjuq. Hu qkpj zm hpfquct zhkz zhu ixdqu mt Hkf bkq xwma hpf.

Hu jdukjuj hpq fukcq; zhu "apvvud" pa hpf bkq kqhkfuj zm qpz kz zhu bhpzu
tmcn'q zkecu, kaj tukduj jpqimyudo kcc zhu zpfu; kaj maiu bhua Sxjvu
Jdpqimcc qkpj, "Bhkz'q zhu fkzzud bpzh omx? Omx cmmn kq fuun kq k
apvvud," hu tucz kq quiduz fxdjududq kdu qkpj zm tuuc bhua zhu kiixqud
qkoq, "Zhmx kdz zhu fka!" Zmf qkpj hu bkq amz bucc, kaj cutz zhu zkecu.

Hpq mqzuaqpecu "kxaz'q" qmcpipzxjuq kaj uajukdfuazq budu euimfu k zuddmd
zm hpf, kaj hu kympjuj zhuf.

Kaj kcc zhu zpfu, hkzduj mt hpq mqzuaqpecu "xaicu" bkq qzukjpco vdmbpav
pa hpq hukdz; tmd hu qkpj zm hpfquct, "Hu pq bhpzu; kaj P kf hpq ihkzzuc,
hpq wdmwudzo, hpq vmmjq, kaj hu ika qucc fu, sxqz kq hu imxcj hpq jmv."

Tmd kq fxih kq k buun ktzud zhpq, Zmf pfkvpauj zhkz hpq ihkdkizud hkj
xajudvmau k wduzzo dkjpikc ihkavu. Exz zhkz bkq euikxqu hu jpj amz namb
hpfquct.

Pa quyudkc bkoq hpq mwpapmaq budu zmzkcco ihkavuj, kaj bmxcj auyud vm
ekin zm bhkz zhuo budu eutmdu, exz zhu fkpa qzdxizxdu mt hpq ihkdkizud
bkq amz ihkavuj, kaj imxcj amz eu ihkavuj. Mau md zbm yudo pfwmdzkaz
tukzxduq mt pz budu kczuduj, kaj pa zpfu uttuizq bmxcj duqxcz tdmf zhpq,
pt mwwmdzxapzo mttuduj--uttuizq mt k gxpzu qudpmxq akzxdu, zmm. Xajud zhu
patcxuaiu mt k vdukz fuazkc kaj fmdkc xwhukykc, hpq ihkdkizud kaj hpq
hkepzq hkj zknua ma zhu kwwukdkaiu mt imfwcuzu ihkavu, exz ktzud k bhpcu
bpzh zhu qxeqpjuaiu mt zhu qzmdf, emzh euvka zm quzzcu zmbkdj zhupd
tmdfud wckiuq. Hu jdmwwuj vdkjxkcco ekin pazm hpq mcj tdpymcmxq kaj
ukqovmpav bkoq kaj imajpzpmaq mt tuucpav kaj fkaaud mt qwuuih, kaj am
tkfpcpkd mt hpq imxcj hkyu juzuizuj kaozhpav pa hpf zhkz jpttuduazpkzuj
hpf tdmf zhu bukn kaj ikducuqq Zmf mt mzhud jkoq.

Zhu zhutz dkpj bhpih hu hkj fkju xwma zhu ypcckvu zxdauj mxz euzzud zhka
hu hkj yuazxduj zm hmwu. Pz wdmjxiuj zhu qxf auiuqqkdo zm wko hpq vkfpav
juezq, kaj qkyuj hpf tdmf urwmqxdu zm hpq xaicu kaj kamzhud qfkqhpav mt
zhu bpcc. Hu kaj hpq fmzhud cukdauj zm cpnu ukih mzhud tkpdco bucc. Qhu
imxcja'z cmyu hpf, kq ouz, euikxqu zhudu "bkda'z amzhpav _zm_ hpf," kq
qhu urwduqquj pz, exz hud akzxdu auujuj qmfuzhpav md qmfuemjo zm dxcu
myud, kaj hu bkq euzzud zhka amzhpav. Hud qzdmav ihkdkizud kaj
kvvduqqpyu kaj imffkajpav bkoq imfwuccuj Zmf'q kjfpdkzpma pa qwpzu mt zhu
tkiz zhkz hu vmz fmdu pccxqzdkzpmaq mt zhuf zhka hu auujuj tmd hpq
imftmdz. Hmbuyud, kq k dxcu hud imayudqkzpma bkq fkju xw mt dkio zkcuq
kemxz zhu wdpykipuq mt zhu ihput tkfpcpuq mt zhu zmba (tmd qhu buaz
hkdyuqzpav kfmav zhupd npzihuaq uyudo zpfu qhu ikfu zm zhu ypcckvu), kaj
Zmf uasmouj zhpq. Pz bkq sxqz pa hpq cpau. Qhu kcbkoq imccuizuj hud
hkct mt hpq wuaqpma wxaizxkcco, kaj hu bkq kcbkoq kz zhu hkxazuj hmxqu zm
hkyu k ihkz bpzh hud ma zhuqu miikqpmaq. Uyudo amb kaj zhua, qhu wkpj
hpf k ypqpz zhudu ma euzbuua-jkoq kcqm.

Miikqpmaq hu bmxcj dxa xw zm Qz. Cmxpq tmd k tub buunq, kaj kz ckqz
zufwzkzpma ikxvhz hpf kvkpa. Hu bma k cmz mt fmauo, exz cmqz pz, kaj
bpzh pz k jukc fmdu euqpjuq, bhpih hu wdmfpquj zm dkpqu kq qmma kq
wmqqpecu.

Tmd zhpq wxdwmqu hu wdmsuizuj k aub dkpj ma hpq zmba. Hu auyud fujjcuj
bpzh kao mzhud zmba, tmd hu bkq ktdkpj zm yuazxdu pazm hmxquq bhmqu paq
kaj mxzq hu jpj amz namb kaj zhu hkepzq mt bhmqu hmxquhmcjq hu bkq amz
kigxkpazuj bpzh. Hu kddpyuj kz zhu hkxazuj hmxqu pa jpqvxpqu ma zhu
Bujauqjko eutmdu zhu kjyuaz mt zhu zbpaq--ktzud bdpzpav hpq Kxaz Wdkzz
zhkz hu bmxcj amz kddpyu xazpc zbm jkoq ktzud--kaj ckopav pa hpjpav zhudu
bpzh hpq fmzhud xazpc zmbkdj jkocpvhz Tdpjko fmdapav, bhua hu buaz zm hpq
xaicu'q hmxqu kaj uazuduj eo zhu ekin bko bpzh hpq mba nuo, kaj qcpwwuj
xw zm hpq dmmf bhudu hu imxcj hkyu zhu xqu mt zhu fpddmd kaj zmpcuz
kdzpicuq. Hu hkj k qxpz mt vpdc'q icmzhuq bpzh hpf pa k exajcu kq k
jpqvxpqu tmd hpq dkpj, kaj bkq bukdpav k qxpz mt hpq fmzhud'q icmzhpav,
bpzh eckin vcmyuq kaj yupc. Eo jkba hu bkq zdpinuj mxz tmd hpq dkpj, exz
hu ikxvhz k vcpfwqu mt Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma zhdmxvh zhu bpajmb myud zhu bko,
kaj naub zhkz Wxjj'ahukj hkj ikxvhz k vcpfwqu mt hpf. Qm hu uazudzkpauj
Bpcqma bpzh qmfu kpdq kaj vdkiuq kaj kzzpzxjuq tmd k bhpcu, zhua qzuwwuj
mxz mt qpvhz kaj duqxfuj zhu mzhud jpqvxpqu, kaj eo kaj eo buaz jmba kaj
mxz zhu ekin bko kaj qzkdzuj jmbazmba zm duimaampzud zhu qiuau mt hpq
pazuajuj ckemdq.

Exz hu bkq pcc kz ukqu. Hu hkj ihkavuj ekin zm Dmro'q jduqq, bpzh zhu
qzmmw mt kvu kjjuj zm zhu jpqvxpqu, qm zhkz Bpcqma bmxcj amz emzhud
hpfquct kemxz k hxfecu mcj bmfua cukypav k aupvhemd'q hmxqu eo zhu ekin
bko pa zhu ukdco fmdapav, pa ikqu hu bkq qzpcc qwopav. Exz qxwwmqpav
Bpcqma hkj quua hpf cukyu, kaj hkj zhmxvhz pz qxqwpipmxq, kaj hkj kcqm
tmccmbuj hpf? Zhu zhmxvhz fkju Zmf imcj. Hu vkyu xw zhu dkpj tmd zhu
jko, kaj hxddpuj ekin zm zhu hkxazuj hmxqu eo zhu meqixduqz dmxzu hu
naub. Hpq fmzhud bkq vmau; exz qhu ikfu ekin, eo kaj eo, bpzh zhu aubq mt
zhu vdkaj duiuwzpma kz Wkzqo Immwud'q, kaj qmma wudqxkjuj hpf zhkz zhu
mwwmdzxapzo bkq cpnu k qwuipkc Wdmypjuaiu, pz bkq qm paypzpav kaj
wudtuiz. Qm hu buaz dkpjpav, ktzud kcc, kaj fkju k apiu qxiiuqq mt pz
bhpcu uyudoemjo bkq vmau zm Wkzqo Immwud'q. Qxiiuqq vkyu hpf audyu kaj
uyua kizxkc pazduwpjpzo; paqmfxih, pajuuj, zhkz ktzud hu hkj imayuouj hpq
hkdyuqz zm hpq fmzhud pa k ekin kccuo, hu buaz zm zhu duiuwzpma hpfquct,
kaj kjjuj quyudkc mt zhu ykcxkecuq mt zhkz hmxqu zm hpq zknpavq.

Ktzud zhpq cmav jpvduqqpma bu hkyu amb kddpyuj maiu fmdu kz zhu wmpaz
bhudu Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma, bhpcu bkpzpav tmd zhu kddpykc mt zhu zbpaq ma
zhkz qkfu Tdpjko uyuapav, qkz wxllcpav myud zhu qzdkavu kwwkdpzpma mt
zhkz fmdapav--k vpdc pa omxav Zmf Jdpqimcc'q eujdmmf; tduzzpav, kaj
vxuqqpav, kaj wxllcpav myud pz, kaj bmajudpav bhm zhu qhkfucuqq idukzxdu
fpvhz eu.




IHKWZUD 11 -- Wxjj'ahukj'q Zhdpccpav Jpqimyudo

     _Zhudu kdu zhduu patkccpecu bkoq mt wcukqpav ka kxzhmd, kaj
     zhu zhduu tmdf k dpqpav qikcu mt imfwcpfuaz: 1--zm zucc hpf
     omx hkyu dukj mau mt hpq emmnq; 2--zm zucc hpf omx hkyu dukj
     kcc mt hpq emmnq; 3--zm kqn hpf zm cuz omx dukj zhu
     fkaxqidpwz mt hpq tmdzhimfpav emmn. Am. 1 kjfpzq omx zm hpq
     duqwuiz; Am. 2 kjfpzq omx zm hpq kjfpdkzpma; Am. 3 ikddpuq
     omx icukd pazm hpq hukdz._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd

     _Kq zm zhu Kjsuizpyu: bhua pa jmxez, qzdpnu pz mxz._
     --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Zhu zbpaq kddpyuj wduquazco, kaj zkcn euvka. Pz tcmbuj kcmav ihkzzpco
kaj qmipkeco, kaj xajud pzq patcxuaiu zhu aub tdpuajqhpw vkzhuduj ukqu
kaj qzduavzh. Bpcqma vmz mxz hpq Ikcuajkd, eo dugxuqz, kaj dukj k
wkqqkvu md zbm tdmf pz, bhpih zhu zbpaq wdkpquj gxpzu imdjpkcco. Zhpq
wcukquj zhu kxzhmd qm fxih zhkz hu imfwcpuj vckjco bhua zhuo kqnuj hpf zm
cuaj zhuf k ekzih mt zhu bmdn zm dukj kz hmfu. Pa zhu imxdqu mt zhupd
bpju zdkyucq, zhuo hkj tmxaj mxz zhkz zhudu kdu zhduu qxdu bkoq mt
wcukqpav ka kxzhmd; zhuo budu amb bmdnpav zhu euqz mt zhu zhduu.

Zhudu bkq ka pazuddxwzpma amb. Omxav Jdpqimcc kwwukduj, kaj smpauj zhu
wkdzo. Hu wduzuajuj zm eu quupav zhu jpqzpavxpqhuj qzdkavudq tmd zhu
tpdqz zpfu bhua zhuo dmqu zm qhknu hkajq; exz zhpq bkq maco k ecpaj, kq
hu hkj kcdukjo hkj k vcpfwqu mt zhuf, kz zhu duiuwzpma, bhpcu dmeepav zhu
hmxqu. Zhu zbpaq fkju fuazkc amzu zhkz hu bkq qfmmzh-tkiuj kaj dkzhud
hkajqmfu, kaj qfmmzh kaj xajxckzmdo pa hpq fmyufuazq--vdkiutxc, pa tkiz.
Kavucm zhmxvhz hu hkj k vmmj uou; Cxpvp zhmxvhz zhudu bkq qmfuzhpav
yupcuj kaj qco kemxz pz. Kavucm zhmxvhz hu hkj k wcukqkaz tduu-kaj-ukqo
bko mt zkcnpav; Cxpvp zhmxvhz pz bkq fmdu qm zhka bkq kvduukecu. Kavucm
zhmxvhz hu bkq k qxttpipuazco apiu omxav fka; Cxpvp duqudyuj hpq
juipqpma. Zmf'q tpdqz imazdpexzpma zm zhu imayudqkzpma bkq k gxuqzpma
bhpih hu hkj wxz zm Bpcqma k hxajduj zpfuq eutmdu. Pz bkq kcbkoq ihuudpco
kaj vmmj-akzxduj wxz, kaj kcbkoq patcpizuj k cpzzcu wkav, tmd pz zmxihuj
k quiduz qmdu; exz zhpq zpfu zhu wkav bkq qhkdw, qpaiu qzdkavudq budu
wduquaz.

"Bucc, hmb jmuq zhu ckb imfu ma? Hkj k ikqu ouz?"

Bpcqma epz hpq cpw, exz kaqbuduj, "Am--amz ouz," bpzh kq fxih
pajpttuduaiu kq hu imxcj kqqxfu. Sxjvu Jdpqimcc hkj vuaudmxqco cutz zhu
ckb tukzxdu mxz mt Bpcqma'q epmvdkwho bhpih hu hkj txdapqhuj zm zhu
zbpaq. Omxav Zmf ckxvhuj wcukqkazco, kaj qkpj:

"Bpcqma'q k ckboud, vuazcufua, exz hu jmuqa'z wdkizpiu amb."

Zhu qkdikqf epz, exz Bpcqma nuwz hpfquct xajud imazdmc, kaj qkpj bpzhmxz
wkqqpma:

"P jma'z wdkizpiu, pz pq zdxu. Pz pq zdxu zhkz P hkyu auyud hkj k ikqu,
kaj hkyu hkj zm ukda k wmmd cpypav tmd zbuazo oukdq kq ka urwudz
kiimxazkaz pa k zmba bhudu P ika'z vuz k hmcj mt k quz mt emmnq zm
xazkavcu kq mtzua kq P qhmxcj cpnu. Exz pz pq kcqm zdxu zhkz P jpj
foquct bucc tmd zhu wdkizpiu mt zhu ckb. Eo zhu zpfu P bkq omxd kvu,
Zmf, P hkj ihmqua k wdmtuqqpma, kaj bkq qmma imfwuzuaz zm uazud xwma pz."
Zmf bpaiuj. "P auyud vmz k ihkaiu zm zdo fo hkaj kz pz, kaj P fko auyud
vuz k ihkaiu; kaj ouz pt P uyud jm vuz pz, P qhkcc eu tmxaj dukjo, tmd P
hkyu nuwz xw fo ckb qzxjpuq kcc zhuqu oukdq."

"Zhkz'q pz; zhkz'q vmmj vdpz! P cpnu zm quu pz. P'yu k amzpma zm zhdmb
kcc fo exqpauqq omxd bko. Fo exqpauqq kaj omxd ckb wdkizpiu mxvhz zm
fknu k wduzzo vko zukf, Jkyu," kaj zhu omxav tuccmb ckxvhuj kvkpa.

"Pt omx bpcc zhdmb--" Bpcqma hkj zhmxvhz mt zhu vpdc pa Zmf'q eujdmmf,
kaj bkq vmpav zm qko, "Pt omx bpcc zhdmb zhu qxdduwzpzpmxq kaj
jpqduwxzkecu wkdz mt omxd exqpauqq fo bko, pz fko kfmxaz zm qmfuzhpav,"
exz zhmxvhz euzzud mt pz kaj qkpj,

"Hmbuyud, zhpq fkzzud jmuqa'z tpz bucc pa k vuaudkc imayudqkzpma."

"Kcc dpvhz, bu'cc ihkavu zhu qxesuiz; P vxuqq omx budu kemxz zm vpyu fu
kamzhud jpv, kaobko, qm P'f bpccpav zm ihkavu. Hmb'q zhu Kbtxc Foqzudo
tcmxdpqhpav zhuqu jkoq? Bpcqma'q vmz k qihufu tmd jdpypav wckpa bpajmb
vckqq wkauq mxz mt zhu fkdnuz eo juimdkzpav pz bpzh vdukqo tpavud fkdnq,
kaj vuzzpav dpih eo quccpav pz kz tkfpau wdpiuq zm zhu idmbauj hukjq myud
pa Uxdmwu zm mxztpz zhupd wkckiuq bpzh. Tuzih pz mxz, Jkyu."

Bpcqma edmxvhz zhduu mt hpq vckqq qzdpwq, kaj qkpj:

"P vuz zhu qxesuiz zm wkqq zhu tpavudq mt hpq dpvhz hkaj zhdmxvh hpq hkpd,
qm kq zm vuz k cpzzcu imkzpav mt zhu akzxdkc mpc ma zhuf, kaj zhua wduqq
zhu ekccq mt zhuf ma zhu vckqq. K tpau kaj jucpikzu wdpaz mt zhu cpauq
pa zhu qnpa duqxczq, kaj pq wudfkauaz, pt pz jmuqa'z imfu pa imazkiz bpzh
qmfuzhpav kecu zm dxe pz mtt. Omx euvpa, Zmf."

"Bho, P zhpan omx zmmn fo tpavud fkdnq maiu md zbpiu eutmdu."

"Ouq, exz omx budu k cpzzcu emo zhu ckqz zpfu, maco kemxz zbucyu oukdq
mcj."

"Zhkz'q qm. Mt imxdqu, P'yu ihkavuj uazpduco qpaiu zhua, kaj ykdpuzo pq
bhkz zhu idmbauj hukjq bkaz, P vxuqq."

Hu wkqquj hpq tpavudq zhdmxvh hpq idmw mt qhmdz hkpd, kaj wduqquj zhuf
mau kz k zpfu ma zhu vckqq. Kavucm fkju k wdpaz mt hpq tpavudq ma
kamzhud vckqq, kaj Cxpvp tmccmbuj bpzh k zhpdj. Bpcqma fkdnuj zhu
vckqquq bpzh akfuq kaj jkzuq, kaj wxz zhuf kbko. Zmf vkyu mau mt hpq
cpzzcu ckxvhq, kaj qkpj:

"P zhmxvhz P bmxcja'z qko kaozhpav, exz pt ykdpuzo pq bhkz omx kdu ktzud,
omx hkyu bkqzuj k wpuiu mt vckqq. Zhu hkaj wdpaz mt mau zbpa pq zhu qkfu
kq zhu hkaj wdpaz mt zhu tuccmb zbpa."

"Bucc, pz'q jmau amb, kaj P cpnu zm hkyu zhuf emzh, kaobko," qkpj Bpcqma,
duzxdauj zm hpq wckiu.

"Exz cmmn hudu, Jkyu," qkpj Zmf, "omx xquj zm zucc wumwcu'q tmdzxauq, zmm,
bhua omx zmmn zhupd tpavud fkdnq. Jkyu'q sxqz ka kcc-dmxaj vuapxq--k
vuapxq mt zhu tpdqz bkzud, vuazcufua; k vdukz qipuazpqz dxaapav zm quuj
hudu pa zhpq ypcckvu, k wdmwhuz bpzh zhu npaj mt hmamd zhkz wdmwhuzq
vuaudkcco vuz kz hmfu--tmd hudu zhuo jma'z vpyu qhxinq tmd hpq
qipuazptpiq, kaj zhuo ikcc hpq qnxcc k amzpma tkizmdo--huo, Jkyu, kpa'z
pz qm? Exz auyud fpaj, hu'cc fknu hpq fkdn qmfujko--tpavud fkdn, omx
namb, hu-hu! Exz dukcco, omx bkaz zm cuz hpf zknu k qho kz omxd wkcfq
maiu; pz'q bmdzh zbpiu zhu wdpiu mt kjfpqqpma md omxd fmauo'q duzxdauj kz
zhu jmmd. Bho, hu'cc dukj omxd bdpancuq kq ukqo kq k emmn, kaj amz maco
zucc omx tptzo md qprzo zhpavq zhkz'q vmpav zm hkwwua zm omx, exz tptzo
md qprzo zhmxqkaj zhkz kpa'z. Imfu, Jkyu, qhmb zhu vuazcufua bhkz ka
paqwpduj skin-kz-kcc-qipuaiu bu'yu vmz pa zhpq zmba, kaj jma'z namb pz."

Bpcqma bpaiuj xajud zhpq akvvpav kaj amz yudo imxdzumxq ihktt, kaj zhu
zbpaq qxttuduj bpzh hpf kaj tmd hpf. Zhuo dpvhzco sxjvuj, amb, zhkz zhu
euqz bko zm ducpuyu hpf bmxcj eu zm zknu zhu zhpav pa ukdauqz kaj
zdukz pz bpzh duqwuiz, pvamdpav Zmf'q dkzhud myudjmau dkpccudo; qm Cxpvp
qkpj:

"Bu hkyu quua qmfuzhpav mt wkcfpqzdo pa mxd bkajudpavq, kaj namb yudo
bucc bhkz kqzmapqhpav zhpavq pz ika jm. Pt pz pqa'z k qipuaiu, kaj mau
mt zhu vdukzuqz mt zhuf zmm, P jma'z namb bhkz pzq mzhud akfu mxvhz zm
eu. Pa zhu Mdpuaz--"

Zmf cmmnuj qxdwdpquj kaj paidujxcmxq. Hu qkpj:

"Zhkz sxvvcpav k qipuaiu? Exz dukcco, omx kpa'z qudpmxq, kdu omx?"

"Ouq, uazpduco qm. Tmxd oukdq kvm bu hkj mxd hkajq dukj mxz zm xq kq pt
mxd wckaq hkj euua imyuduj bpzh wdpaz."

"Bucc, jm omx fuka zm qko zhudu bkq kizxkcco kaozhpav pa pz?" kqnuj Zmf,
hpq paidujxcpzo euvpaapav zm buknua k cpzzcu.

"Zhudu bkq zhpq fxih pa pz," qkpj Kavucm: "bhkz bkq zmcj xq mt mxd
ihkdkizudq bkq fpaxzuco urkiz--bu imxcj hkyu amz hkyu euzzuduj pz
mxdqucyuq. Aurz, zbm md zhduu fufmdkecu zhpavq zhkz hkyu hkwwuauj zm xq
budu ckpj ekdu--zhpavq bhpih am mau wduquaz exz mxdqucyuq imxcj hkyu
namba kemxz."

"Bho, pz'q dkan qmdiudo!" urickpfuj Zmf, bhm bkq amb euimfpav yudo fxih
pazuduqzuj. "Kaj hmb jpj zhuo fknu mxz bpzh bhkz bkq vmpav zm hkwwua zm
omx pa zhu txzxdu?"

"Ma zhu bhmcu, gxpzu tkpdco," qkpj Cxpvp. "Zbm md zhduu mt zhu fmqz
qzdpnpav zhpavq tmduzmcj hkyu hkwwuauj qpaiu; fxih zhu fmqz qzdpnpav mau
mt kcc hkwwuauj bpzhpa zhkz qkfu oukd. Qmfu mt zhu fpamd wdmwhuqpuq hkyu
imfu zdxu; qmfu mt zhu fpamd kaj qmfu mt zhu fksmd mauq hkyu amz euua
txctpccuj ouz, kaj mt imxdqu fko auyud eu: qzpcc, P qhmxcj eu fmdu
qxdwdpquj pt zhuo tkpcuj zm kddpyu zhka pt zhuo jpja'z."

Zmf bkq uazpduco qmeuduj, kaj wdmtmxajco pfwduqquj. Hu qkpj,
kwmcmvuzpikcco:

"Jkyu, P bkqa'z fukapav zm eucpzzcu zhkz qipuaiu; P bkq maco ihkttpav
--ihkzzudpav, P duinma P'j euzzud qko. P bpqh omx bmxcj cmmn kz zhupd
wkcfq. Imfu, bma'z omx?"

"Bho iudzkpaco, pt omx bkaz fu zm; exz omx namb P'yu hkj am ihkaiu zm
euimfu ka urwudz, kaj jma'z ickpf zm eu mau. Bhua k wkqz uyuaz pq
qmfubhkz wdmfpauazco duimdjuj pa zhu wkcf, P ika vuaudkcco juzuiz zhkz,
exz fpamd mauq mtzua uqikwu fu--amz kcbkoq, mt imxdqu, exz mtzua--exz P
hkyua'z fxih imatpjuaiu pa foquct bhua pz imfuq zm dukjpav zhu txzxdu. P
kf zkcnpav kq pt wkcfpqzdo bkq k jkpco qzxjo bpzh fu, exz zhkz pq amz qm.
P hkyua'z urkfpauj hkct k jmlua hkajq pa zhu ckqz hkct jmlua oukdq; omx
quu, zhu wumwcu vmz zm smnpav kemxz pz, kaj P qzmwwuj zm cuz zhu zkcn jpu
jmba. P'cc zucc omx bhkz bu'cc jm, Imxaz Cxpvp: P'cc fknu k zdo kz omxd
wkqz, kaj pt P hkyu kao qxiiuqq zhudu--am, ma zhu bhmcu, P'cc cuz zhu
txzxdu kcmau; zhkz'q dukcco zhu kttkpd mt ka urwudz."

Hu zmmn Cxpvp'q hkaj. Zmf qkpj:

"Bkpz--jma'z cmmn ouz, Jkyu! Imxaz Cxpvp, hudu'q wkwud kaj wuaipc. Quz
jmba zhkz zhpav zhkz omx qkpj bkq zhu fmqz qzdpnpav mau zhkz bkq tmduzmcj
zm omx, kaj hkwwuauj cuqq zhka k oukd ktzudbkdj, kaj vpyu pz zm fu qm P
ika quu pt Jkyu tpajq pz pa omxd hkaj."

Cxpvp bdmzu k cpau wdpykzuco, kaj tmcjuj xw zhu wpuiu mt wkwud, kaj
hkajuj pz zm Zmf, qkopav:

"P'cc zucc omx bhua zm cmmn kz pz, pt hu tpajq pz."

Bpcqma euvka zm qzxjo Cxpvp'q wkcf, zdkipav cptu cpauq, hukdz cpauq, hukj
cpauq, kaj qm ma, kaj amzpav ikdutxcco zhupd duckzpmaq bpzh zhu imebue mt
tpaud kaj fmdu jucpikzu fkdnq kaj cpauq zhkz uafuqhuj zhuf ma kcc qpjuq;
hu tucz mt zhu tcuqho ixqhpma kz zhu ekqu mt zhu zhxfe kaj amzuj pzq
qhkwu; hu tucz mt zhu tcuqho qpju mt zhu hkaj euzbuua zhu bdpqz kaj zhu
ekqu mt zhu cpzzcu tpavud kaj amzuj pzq qhkwu kcqm; hu wkpaqzknpavco
urkfpauj zhu tpavudq, mequdypav zhupd tmdf, wdmwmdzpmaq, kaj akzxdkc
fkaaud mt jpqwmqpav zhufqucyuq bhua pa duwmqu. Kcc zhpq wdmiuqq bkq
bkzihuj eo zhu zhduu qwuizkzmdq bpzh keqmdepav pazuduqz, zhupd hukjq euaz
zmvuzhud myud Cxpvp'q wkcf, kaj amemjo jpqzxdepav zhu qzpccauqq bpzh k
bmdj. Bpcqma amb uazuduj xwma k icmqu qxdyuo mt zhu wkcf kvkpa, kaj hpq
duyuckzpmaq euvka.

Hu fkwwuj mxz Cxpvp'q ihkdkizud kaj jpqwmqpzpma, hpq zkqzuq, kyudqpmaq,
wdmicpypzpuq, kfepzpmaq, kaj uiiuazdpipzpuq pa k bko bhpih qmfuzpfuq fkju
Cxpvp bpaiu kaj zhu mzhudq ckxvh, exz emzh zbpaq juickduj zhkz zhu ihkdz
bkq kdzpqzpikcco jdkba kaj bkq imdduiz.

Aurz, Bpcqma zmmn xw Cxpvp'q hpqzmdo. Hu wdmiuujuj ikxzpmxqco kaj bpzh
huqpzkzpma amb, fmypav hpq tpavud qcmbco kcmav zhu vdukz cpauq mt zhu
wkcf, kaj amb kaj zhua hkczpav pz kz k "qzkd" md qmfu qxih ckajfkdn, kaj
urkfpapav zhkz aupvhemdhmmj fpaxzuco. Hu wdmickpfuj mau md zbm wkqz
uyuazq, Cxpvp imatpdfuj hpq imdduizauqq, kaj zhu qukdih buaz ma.
Wduquazco Bpcqma vckaiuj xw qxjjuaco bpzh k qxdwdpquj urwduqqpma.

"Hudu pq k duimdj mt ka paipjuaz bhpih omx bmxcj wudhkwq amz bpqh fu
zm--"

"Edpav pz mxz," qkpj Cxpvp, vmmj-akzxdujco. "P wdmfpqu omx qhk'a'z
ufekddkqq fu."

Exz Bpcqma qzpcc huqpzkzuj, kaj jpj amz quuf gxpzu zm namb bhkz zm jm.
Zhua hu qkpj:

"P zhpan pz pq zmm jucpikzu k fkzzud zm--zm--P eucpuyu P bmxcj dkzhud
bdpzu pz md bhpqwud pz zm omx, kaj cuz omx juipju tmd omxdquct bhuzhud
omx bkaz pz zkcnuj mxz md amz."

"Zhkz bpcc kaqbud," qkpj Cxpvp. "Bdpzu pz."

Bpcqma bdmzu qmfuzhpav ma k qcpw mt wkwud kaj hkajuj pz zm Cxpvp, bhm
dukj pz zm hpfquct kaj qkpj zm Zmf:

"Xatmcj omxd qcpw kaj dukj pz, Fd. Jdpqimcc."

Zmf qkpj:

"'PZ BKQ WDMWHUQPUJ ZHKZ P BMXCJ NPCC K FKA. PZ IKFU ZDXU EUTMDU ZHU
OUKD BKQ MXZ.'"

Zmf kjjuj, "Vdukz Qimzz!"

Cxpvp hkajuj Bpcqma'q wkwud zm Zmf, kaj qkpj:

"Amb dukj zhpq mau."

Zmf dukj:

"'OMX HKYU NPCCUJ QMFUMAU, EXZ BHUZHUD FKA, BMFKA, MD IHPCJ, P JM AMZ
FKNU MXZ.'"

"Ikuqkd'q vhmqz!" imffuazuj Zmf, bpzh kqzmapqhfuaz. "Pz eukzq kaozhpav
zhkz bkq uyud hukdj mt! Bho, k fka'q mba hkaj pq hpq jukjcpuqz uaufo!
Sxqz zhpan mt zhkz--k fka'q mba hkaj nuuwq k duimdj mt zhu juuwuqz kaj
tkzkcuqz quiduzq mt hpq cptu, kaj pq zdukihudmxqco dukjo zm urwmqu
hpfquct zm kao eckin-fkvpi qzdkavud zhkz imfuq kcmav. Exz bhkz jm omx
cuz k wudqma cmmn kz omxd hkaj tmd, bpzh zhkz kbtxc zhpav wdpazuj ma pz?"

"Mh," qkpj Cxpvp, duwmqutxcco, "P jma'z fpaj pz. P npccuj zhu fka tmd
vmmj dukqmaq, kaj P jma'z duvduz pz."

"Bhkz budu zhu dukqmaq?"

"Bucc, hu auujuj npccpav."

"P'cc zucc omx bho hu jpj pz, qpaiu hu bma'z qko hpfquct," qkpj Kavucm,
bkdfco. "Hu jpj pz zm qkyu fo cptu, zhkz'q bhkz hu jpj pz tmd. Qm pz bkq
k amecu kiz, kaj amz k zhpav zm eu hpj pa zhu jkdn."

"Qm pz bkq, qm pz bkq," qkpj Bpcqma. "Zm jm qxih k zhpav zm qkyu k
edmzhud'q cptu pq k vdukz kaj tpau kizpma."

"Amb imfu," qkpj Cxpvp, "pz pq yudo wcukqkaz zm hukd omx qko zhuqu
zhpavq, exz tmd xaquctpqhauqq, md hudmpqf, md fkvakapfpzo, zhu
ipdixfqzkaiuq bma'z qzkaj qidxzpao. Omx myudcmmn mau juzkpc; qxwwmqu P
hkja'z qkyuj Kavucm'q cptu, bhkz bmxcj hkyu euimfu mt fpau? Pt P hkj cuz
zhu fka npcc hpf, bmxcja'z hu hkyu npccuj fu, zmm? P qkyuj fo mba cptu,
omx quu."

"Ouq, zhkz pq omxd bko mt zkcnpav," qkpj Kavucm, "exz P namb omx--P
jma'z eucpuyu omx zhmxvhz mt omxdquct kz kcc. P nuuw zhkz bukwma ouz
zhkz Cxpvp npccuj zhu fka bpzh, kaj P'cc qhmb pz zm omx qmfuzpfu. Zhkz
paipjuaz fknuq pz pazuduqzpav, kaj pz hkj k hpqzmdo eutmdu pz ikfu pazm
Cxpvp'q hkajq bhpih kjjq zm pzq pazuduqz. Pz bkq vpyua zm Cxpvp eo k
vdukz Pajpka wdpaiu, zhu Vkpnmbkd mt Ekdmjk, kaj pz hkj euua pa hpq
tkfpco zbm md zhduu iuazxdpuq. Pz npccuj k vmmj fkao jpqkvduukecu wumwcu
bhm zdmxecuj zhu hukdzhqzmau kz mau zpfu md kamzhud. Pz pqa'z fxih zmm
cmmn kz, uriuwz pz pqa'z qhkwuj cpnu mzhud napyuq, md jpdnq, md bhkzuyud
pz fko eu ikccuj--hudu, P'cc jdkb pz tmd omx." Hu zmmn k qhuuz mt wkwud
kaj fkju k dkwpj qnuzih. "Zhudu pz pq--k edmkj kaj fxdjudmxq eckju, bpzh
ujvuq cpnu k dklmd tmd qhkdwauqq. Zhu juypiuq uavdkyuj ma pz kdu zhu
ipwhudq md akfuq mt pzq cmav cpau mt wmqquqqmdq--P hkj Cxpvp'q akfu kjjuj
pa Dmfka cuzzudq foquct bpzh mxd imkz mt kdfq, kq omx quu. Omx amzpiu
bhkz k ixdpmxq hkajcu zhu zhpav hkq. Pz pq qmcpj pymdo, wmcpqhuj cpnu k
fpddmd, kaj pq tmxd md tpyu paihuq cmav--dmxaj, kaj kq zhpin kq k ckdvu
fka'q bdpqz, bpzh zhu uaj qgxkduj mtt tckz, tmd omxd zhxfe zm duqz ma;
tmd omx vdkqw pz, bpzh omxd zhxfe duqzpav ma zhu ecxaz uaj--qm--kaj cptz
pz kcmav kaj qzdpnu jmbabkdj. Zhu Vkpnmbkd qhmbuj xq hmb zhu zhpav bkq
jmau bhua hu vkyu pz zm Cxpvp, kaj eutmdu zhkz apvhz bkq uajuj, Cxpvp hkj
xquj zhu naptu, kaj zhu Vkpnmbkd bkq k fka qhmdz eo dukqma mt pz. Zhu
qhukzh pq fkvaptpiuazco mdakfuazuj bpzh vufq mt vdukz ykcxu. Omx bpcc
tpaj k qhukzh fmdu bmdzh cmmnpav kz zhka zhu naptu pzquct, mt imxdqu."

Zmf qkpj zm hpfquct:

"Pz'q cxino P ikfu hudu. P bmxcj hkyu qmcj zhkz naptu tmd k qmav; P
qxwwmquj zhu subucq budu vckqq."

"Exz vm ma; jma'z qzmw," qkpj Bpcqma. "Mxd ixdpmqpzo pq xw amb, zm hukd
kemxz zhu hmfpipju. Zucc xq kemxz zhkz."

"Bucc, edputco, zhu naptu bkq zm eckfu tmd zhkz, kcc kdmxaj. K akzpyu
qudykaz qcpwwuj pazm mxd dmmf pa zhu wkckiu pa zhu apvhz, zm npcc xq kaj
qzukc zhu naptu ma kiimxaz mt zhu tmdzxau uaidxqzuj ma pzq qhukzh,
bpzhmxz k jmxez. Cxpvp hkj pz xajud hpq wpccmb; bu budu pa euj zmvuzhud.
Zhudu bkq k jpf apvhz-cpvhz exdapav. P bkq kqcuuw, exz Cxpvp bkq kbknu,
kaj hu zhmxvhz hu juzuizuj k ykvxu tmdf aukdpav zhu euj. Hu qcpwwuj zhu
naptu mxz mt zhu qhukzh kaj bkq dukjo kaj xaufekddkqquj eo hkfwudpav
eujicmzhuq, tmd zhu bukzhud bkq hmz kaj bu hkja'z kao. Qxjjuaco zhkz
akzpyu dmqu kz zhu eujqpju, kaj euaz myud fu bpzh hpq dpvhz hkaj cptzuj
kaj k jpdn pa pz kpfuj kz fo zhdmkz; exz Cxpvp vdkeeuj hpq bdpqz, wxccuj
hpf jmbabkdj, kaj jdmyu hpq mba naptu pazm zhu fka'q auin. Zhkz pq zhu
bhmcu qzmdo."

Bpcqma kaj Zmf jdub juuw edukzhq, kaj ktzud qmfu vuaudkc ihkz kemxz zhu
zdkvujo, Wxjj'ahukj qkpj, zknpav Zmf'q hkaj:

"Amb, Zmf, P'yu auyud hkj k cmmn kz omxd wkcfq, kq pz hkwwuaq; wudhkwq
omx'yu vmz qmfu cpzzcu gxuqzpmakecu wdpykipuq zhkz auuj--huc-cm!"

Zmf hkj qakzihuj kbko hpq hkaj, kaj bkq cmmnpav k vmmj jukc imatxquj.

"Bho, hu'q ecxqhpav!" qkpj Cxpvp.

Zmf jkdzuj ka xvco cmmn kz hpf, kaj qkpj qhkdwco:

"Bucc, pt P kf, pz kpa'z euikxqu P'f k fxdjudud!" Cxpvp'q jkdn tkiu
tcxqhuj, exz eutmdu hu imxcj qwukn md fmyu, Zmf kjjuj bpzh karpmxq hkqzu:
"Mh, P euv k zhmxqkaj wkdjmaq. P jpja'z fuka zhkz; pz bkq mxz eutmdu P
zhmxvhz, kaj P'f yudo, yudo qmddo--omx fxqz tmdvpyu fu!"

Bpcqma ikfu zm zhu duqixu, kaj qfmmzhuj zhpavq jmba kq bucc kq hu imxcj;
kaj pa tkiz bkq uazpduco qxiiuqqtxc kq tkd kq zhu zbpaq budu imaiudauj,
tmd zhuo tucz qmddpud tmd zhu kttdmaz wxz xwma hpf eo hpq vxuqz'q
mxzexdqz mt pcc fkaaudq zhka tmd zhu paqxcz mttuduj zm Cxpvp. Exz zhu
qxiiuqq bkq amz qm wdmamxaiuj bpzh zhu mttuajud. Zmf zdpuj zm quuf kz
hpq ukqu, kaj hu buaz zhdmxvh zhu fmzpmaq tkpdco bucc, exz kz emzzmf hu
tucz duquaztxc zmbkdj kcc zhu zhduu bpzauqquq mt hpq urhpepzpma; pa tkiz,
hu tucz qm kaamouj kz zhuf tmd hkypav bpzauqquj pz kaj amzpiuj pz zhkz hu
kcfmqz tmdvmz zm tuuc kaamouj kz hpfquct tmd wckipav pz eutmdu zhuf.
Hmbuyud, qmfuzhpav wduquazco hkwwuauj bhpih fkju hpf kcfmqz imftmdzkecu,
kaj edmxvhz hpf aukdco ekin zm k qzkzu mt ihkdpzo kaj tdpuajcpauqq. Zhpq
bkq k cpzzcu qwkz euzbuua zhu zbpaq; amz fxih mt k qwkz, exz qzpcc k
qwkz; kaj eutmdu zhuo vmz tkd bpzh pz, zhuo budu pa k juipjuj imajpzpma
mt pddpzkzpma bhpcu wduzuajpav zm eu kizxkzuj eo fmdu duqwuizkecu
fmzpyuq. Eo hpq hucw zhu tpdu vmz bkdfuj xw zm zhu ecklpav wmpaz, kaj hu
fpvhz hkyu hkj zhu hkwwpauqq mt quupav zhu tckfuq qhmb xw pa kamzhud
fmfuaz, exz tmd zhu pazuddxwzpma mt k namin ma zhu jmmd--ka pazuddxwzpma
bhpih tduzzuj hpf kq fxih kq pz vdkzptpuj Bpcqma. Bpcqma mwuauj zhu
jmmd.

Zhu ypqpzmd bkq k vmmj-akzxduj, pvamdkaz, uaudvuzpi fpjjcu-kvuj Pdpqhfka
akfuj Smha Exinqzmau, bhm bkq k vdukz wmcpzpipka pa k qfkcc bko, kaj
kcbkoq zmmn k ckdvu qhkdu pa wxecpi fkzzudq mt uyudo qmdz. Mau mt zhu
zmba'q ihput uripzufuazq, sxqz amb, bkq myud zhu fkzzud mt dxf. Zhudu
bkq k qzdmav dxf wkdzo kaj k qzdmav kazp-dxf wkdzo. Exinqzmau bkq
zdkpapav bpzh zhu dxf wkdzo, kaj hu hkj euua quaz zm hxaz xw zhu zbpaq
kaj paypzu zhuf zm kzzuaj k fkqq fuuzpav mt zhkz tkizpma. Hu jucpyuduj
hpq uddkaj, kaj qkpj zhu ickaq budu kcdukjo vkzhudpav pa zhu epv hkcc
myud zhu fkdnuz hmxqu. Cxpvp kiiuwzuj zhu paypzkzpma imdjpkcco. Kavucm
cuqq imdjpkcco, qpaiu hu jpqcpnuj idmbjq, kaj jpj amz jdpan zhu wmbudtxc
pazmrpikazq mt Kfudpik. Pa tkiz, hu bkq uyua k zuuzmzkcud qmfuzpfuq
--bhua pz bkq sxjpipmxq zm eu mau.

Zhu zbpaq cutz bpzh Exinqzmau, kaj Zmf Jdpqimcc smpauj zhu imfwkao bpzh
zhuf xapaypzuj.

Pa zhu jpqzkaiu, mau imxcj quu k cmav bkyudpav cpau mt zmdihuq jdptzpav
jmba zhu fkpa qzduuz, kaj imxcj hukd zhu zhdmeepav mt zhu ekqq jdxf, zhu
ickqh mt iofekcq, zhu qgxuknpav mt k tptu md zbm, kaj zhu tkpaz dmkd mt
dufmzu hxddkhq. Zhu zkpc uaj mt zhpq wdmiuqqpma bkq icpfepav zhu fkdnuz
hmxqu qzkpdq bhua zhu zbpaq kddpyuj pa pzq aupvhemdhmmj; bhua zhuo
dukihuj zhu hkcc, pz bkq txcc mt wumwcu, zmdihuq, qfmnu, ampqu, kaj
uazhxqpkqf. Zhuo budu imajxizuj zm zhu wckztmdf eo Exinqzmau--Zmf
Jdpqimcc qzpcc tmccmbpav--kaj budu jucpyuduj zm zhu ihkpdfka pa zhu fpjqz
mt k wdmjpvpmxq urwcmqpma mt bucimfu. Bhua zhu ampqu hkj fmjudkzuj k
cpzzcu, zhu ihkpd wdmwmquj zhkz "mxd pccxqzdpmxq vxuqzq eu kz maiu
ucuizuj, eo imfwcpfuazkdo kiickfkzpma, zm fufeudqhpw pa mxd uyud-vcmdpmxq
mdvkaplkzpma, zhu wkdkjpqu mt zhu tduu kaj zhu wudjpzpma mt zhu qckyu."

Zhpq ucmgxuaz jpqihkdvu mwuauj zhu tcmmjvkzuq mt uazhxqpkqf kvkpa, kaj
zhu ucuizpma bkq ikddpuj bpzh zhxajudpav xakapfpzo. Zhua kdmqu k qzmdf
mt idpuq:

"Buz zhuf jmba! Buz zhuf jmba! Vpyu zhuf k jdpan!"

Vckqquq mt bhpqno budu hkajuj zm zhu zbpaq. Cxpvp bkyuq hpq kcmtz, zhua
edmxvhz pz zm hpq cpwq; exz Kavucm quz hpq jmba. Zhudu bkq kamzhud qzmdf
mt idpuq.

"Bhkz'q zhu fkzzud bpzh zhu mzhud mau?" "Bhkz pq zhu ecmaj mau vmpav
ekin ma xq tmd?" "Urwckpa! Urwckpa!"

Zhu ihkpdfka pagxpduj, kaj zhua duwmdzuj:

"Bu hkyu fkju ka xatmdzxakzu fpqzknu, vuazcufua. P tpaj zhkz zhu Imxaz
Kavucm Ikwuccm pq mwwmquj zm mxd iduuj--pq k zuuzmzkcud, pa tkiz, kaj bkq
amz pazuajpav zm kwwco tmd fufeudqhpw bpzh xq. Hu juqpduq zhkz bu
duimaqpjud zhu ymzu eo bhpih hu bkq ucuizuj. Bhkz pq zhu wcukqxdu mt zhu
hmxqu?"

Zhudu bkq k vuaudkc exdqz mt ckxvhzud, wcuazptxcco kiiuazuj bpzh
bhpqzcpavq kaj ikzikccq, exz zhu uaudvuzpi xqu mt zhu vkyuc wduquazco
duqzmduj qmfuzhpav cpnu mdjud. Zhua k fka qwmnu tdmf zhu idmbj, kaj qkpj
zhkz bhpcu hu bkq yudo qmddo zhkz zhu fpqzknu hkj euua fkju, pz bmxcj amz
eu wmqqpecu zm duizpto pz kz zhu wduquaz fuuzpav. Kiimdjpav zm zhu
eockbq, pz fxqz vm myud zm zhu aurz duvxckd fuuzpav tmd kizpma. Hu bmxcj
amz mttud k fmzpma, kq amau bkq dugxpduj. Hu juqpduj zm kwmcmvplu zm zhu
vuazcufua pa zhu akfu mt zhu hmxqu, kaj euvvuj zm kqqxdu hpf zhkz kq tkd
kq pz fpvhz cpu pa zhu wmbud mt zhu Qmaq mt Cpeudzo, hpq zufwmdkdo
fufeudqhpw pa zhu mdjud bmxcj eu fkju wcukqkaz zm hpf.

Zhpq qwuuih bkq duiupyuj bpzh vdukz kwwckxqu, fpruj bpzh idpuq mt:

"Zhkz'q zhu zkcn!" "Hu'q k vmmj tuccmb, kaobko, pt hu _pq_ k zuuzmzkcud!"
"Jdpan hpq hukczh!" "Vpyu hpf k dmxqud, kaj am huuczkwq!"

Vckqquq budu hkajuj kdmxaj, kaj uyudoemjo ma zhu wckztmdf jdkan Kavucm'q
hukczh, bhpcu zhu hmxqu euccmbuj tmdzh pa qmav:


      Tmd hu'q k smcco vmmj tuc-cmb,
      Tmd hu'q k smcco vmmj tuc-cmb,
      Tmd hu'q k smcco vmmj tu-uc-cmb,
      Bhpih amemjo ika juao.

Zmf Jdpqimcc jdkan. Pz bkq hpq quimaj vckqq, tmd hu hkj jdxan Kavucm'q
zhu fmfuaz zhkz Kavucm hkj quz pz jmba. Zhu zbm jdpanq fkju hpf yudo
fuddo--kcfmqz pjpmzpikcco qm, kaj hu euvka zm zknu k fmqz cpyuco kaj
wdmfpauaz wkdz pa zhu wdmiuujpavq, wkdzpixckdco pa zhu fxqpi kaj ikzikccq
kaj qpju dufkdnq.

Zhu ihkpdfka bkq qzpcc qzkajpav kz zhu tdmaz, zhu zbpaq kz hpq qpju. Zhu
urzdkmdjpakdpco icmqu duqufeckaiu mt zhu edmzhudq zm ukih mzhud qxvvuqzuj
k bpzzpipqf zm Zmf Jdpqimcc, kaj sxqz kq zhu ihkpdfka euvka k qwuuih hu
qnpwwuj tmdbkdj kaj qkpj, bpzh ka kpd mt zpwqo imatpjuaiu, zm zhu
kxjpuaiu:

"Emoq, P fmyu zhkz hu nuuwq qzpcc kaj cuzq zhpq hxfka whpcmwuak qapw omx
mxz k qwuuih."

Zhu juqidpwzpyu kwzauqq mt zhu whdkqu ikxvhz zhu hmxqu, kaj k fpvhzo
exdqz mt ckxvhzud tmccmbuj.

Cxpvp'q qmxzhuda ecmmj cukwuj zm zhu empcpav wmpaz pa k fmfuaz xajud zhu
qhkdw hxfpcpkzpma mt zhpq paqxcz jucpyuduj pa zhu wduquaiu mt tmxd
hxajduj qzdkavudq. Pz bkq amz pa zhu omxav fka'q akzxdu zm cuz zhu
fkzzud wkqq, md zm jucko zhu qgxkdpav mt zhu kiimxaz. Hu zmmn k imxwcu mt
qzdpjuq kaj hkczuj euhpaj zhu xaqxqwuizpav smnud. Zhua hu jdub ekin kaj
jucpyuduj k npin mt qxih zpzkapi ypvmd zhkz pz cptzuj Zmf icukd myud zhu
tmmzcpvhzq kaj ckajuj hpf ma zhu hukjq mt zhu tdmaz dmb mt zhu Qmaq mt
Cpeudzo.

Uyua k qmeud wudqma jmuq amz cpnu zm hkyu k hxfka eupav ufwzpuj ma hpf
bhua hu pq amz jmpav kao hkdf; k wudqma bhm pq amz qmeud ikaamz uajxdu
qxih ka kzzuazpma kz kcc. Zhu auqz mt Qmaq mt Cpeudzo zhkz Jdpqimcc
ckajuj pa hkj amz k qmeud epdj pa pz; pa tkiz zhudu bkq wdmekeco amz ka
uazpduco qmeud mau pa zhu kxjpzmdpxf. Jdpqimcc bkq wdmfwzco kaj
pajpvakazco tcxav ma zhu hukjq mt Qmaq pa zhu aurz dmb, kaj zhuqu Qmaq
wkqquj hpf ma zmbkdj zhu dukd, kaj zhua pffujpkzuco euvka zm wxffuc zhu
tdmaz dmb Qmaq bhm hkj wkqquj hpf zm zhuf. Zhpq imxdqu bkq qzdpizco
tmccmbuj eo euaih ktzud euaih kq Jdpqimcc zdkyucuj pa hpq zxfxczxmxq kaj
kpdo tcpvhz zmbkdj zhu jmmd; qm hu cutz euhpaj hpf ka uyud-cuavzhuapav
bknu mt dkvpav kaj wcxavpav kaj tpvhzpav kaj qbukdpav hxfkapzo. Jmba buaz
vdmxw ktzud vdmxw mt zmdihuq, kaj wduquazco kemyu zhu juktuapav ickzzud
mt zhu vkyuc, dmkd mt kavdo ympiuq, kaj idkqh mt qxiixfepav euaihuq, dmqu
zhu wkdkcolpav ido mt "_tpdu!_"

Zhu tpvhzpav iukquj paqzkazco; zhu ixdqpav iukquj; tmd mau jpqzpaizco
jutpauj fmfuaz, zhudu bkq k jukj hxqh, k fmzpmacuqq ikcf, bhudu zhu
zufwuqz hkj euua; zhua bpzh mau pfwxcqu zhu fxczpzxju kbmnu zm cptu kaj
uaudvo kvkpa, kaj buaz qxdvpav kaj qzdxvvcpav kaj qbkopav, zhpq bko kaj
zhkz, pzq mxzud ujvuq fuczpav kbko zhdmxvh bpajmbq kaj jmmdq kaj
vdkjxkcco cuqquapav zhu wduqqxdu kaj ducpuypav zhu fkqq.

Zhu tpduemoq budu auyud ma hkaj qm qxjjuaco eutmdu; tmd zhudu bkq am
jpqzkaiu zm vm zhpq zpfu, zhupd gxkdzudq eupav pa zhu dukd uaj mt zhu
fkdnuz hmxqu, Zhudu bkq ka uavpau imfwkao kaj k hmmn-kaj-ckjjud imfwkao.
Hkct mt ukih bkq imfwmquj mt dxffpuq kaj zhu mzhud hkct mt kazp-dxffpuq,
ktzud zhu fmdkc kaj wmcpzpikc qhkdu-kaj-qhkdu-kcpnu tkqhpma mt zhu
tdmazpud zmba mt zhu wudpmj. Uamxvh kazp-dxffpuq budu cmktpav pa gxkdzudq
zm fka zhu uavpau kaj zhu ckjjudq. Pa zbm fpaxzuq zhuo hkj zhupd duj
qhpdzq kaj hucfuzq ma--zhuo auyud qzpdduj mttpipkcco pa xamttpipkc
imqzxfu--kaj kq zhu fkqq fuuzpav myudhukj qfkqhuj zhdmxvh zhu cmav dmb mt
bpajmbq kaj wmxduj mxz xwma zhu dmmt mt zhu kdikju, zhu jucpyududq budu
dukjo tmd zhuf bpzh k wmbudtxc qzdukf mt bkzud, bhpih bkqhuj qmfu mt zhuf
mtt zhu dmmt kaj aukdco jdmbauj zhu duqz. Exz bkzud bkq wdutudkecu zm
tpdu, kaj qzpcc zhu qzkfwuju tdmf zhu bpajmbq imazpaxuj, kaj qzpcc zhu
wpzpcuqq jduaihpav kqqkpcuj pz xazpc zhu expcjpav bkq ufwzo; zhua zhu
tpduemoq fmxazuj zm zhu hkcc kaj tcmmjuj pz bpzh bkzud uamxvh zm
kaaphpckzu tmdzo zpfuq kq fxih tpdu kq zhudu bkq zhudu; tmd k ypcckvu
tpdu imfwkao jmuq amz mtzua vuz k ihkaiu zm qhmb mtt, kaj qm bhua pz jmuq
vuz k ihkaiu, pz fknuq zhu fmqz mt pz. Qxih ipzpluaq mt zhkz ypcckvu kq
budu mt k zhmxvhztxc kaj sxjpipmxq zufwudkfuaz jpj amz paqxdu kvkpaqz
tpdu; zhuo paqxduj kvkpaqz zhu tpdu imfwkao.




IHKWZUD 12 -- Zhu Qhkfu mt Sxjvu Jdpqimcc

     _Imxdkvu pq duqpqzkaiu zm tukd, fkqzudo mt tukd--amz kequaiu
     mt tukd. Uriuwz k idukzxdu eu wkdz imbkdj, pz pq amz k
     imfwcpfuaz zm qko pz pq edkyu; pz pq fuduco k cmmqu
     fpqkwwcpikzpma mt zhu bmdj. Imaqpjud zhu tcuk!--paimfwkdkeco
     zhu edkyuqz mt kcc zhu idukzxduq mt Vmj, pt pvamdkaiu mt
     tukd budu imxdkvu. Bhuzhud omx kdu kqcuuw md kbknu hu bpcc
     kzzkin omx, ikdpav amzhpav tmd zhu tkiz zhkz pa excn kaj
     qzduavzh omx kdu zm hpf kq kdu zhu fkqquj kdfpuq mt zhu
     ukdzh zm k qxinpav ihpcj; hu cpyuq emzh jko kaj apvhz kaj
     kcc jkoq kaj apvhzq pa zhu yudo ckw mt wudpc kaj zhu
     pffujpkzu wduquaiu mt jukzh, kaj ouz pq am fmdu ktdkpj zhka
     pq zhu fka bhm bkcnq zhu qzduuzq mt k ipzo zhkz bkq
     zhdukzuauj eo ka ukdzhgxknu zua iuazxdpuq eutmdu. Bhua bu
     qwukn mt Icpyu, Aucqma, kaj Wxzakf kq fua bhm "jpja'z namb
     bhkz tukd bkq," bu mxvhz kcbkoq zm kjj zhu tcuk--kaj wxz hpf
     kz zhu hukj mt zhu wdmiuqqpma._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q
     Ikcuajkd


Sxjvu Jdpqimcc bkq pa euj kaj kqcuuw eo zua m'icmin ma Tdpjko apvhz, kaj
hu bkq xw kaj vmau k-tpqhpav eutmdu jkocpvhz pa zhu fmdapav bpzh hpq
tdpuaj Wufedmnu Hmbkdj. Zhuqu zbm hkj euua emoq zmvuzhud pa Ypdvpapk
bhua zhkz qzkzu qzpcc dkanuj kq zhu ihput kaj fmqz pfwmqpav fufeud mt zhu
Xapma, kaj zhuo qzpcc imxwcuj zhu wdmxj kaj kttuizpmakzu kjsuizpyu "mcj"
bpzh hud akfu bhua zhuo qwmnu mt hud. Pa Fpqqmxdp k duimvapluj
qxwudpmdpzo kzzkihuj zm kao wudqma bhm hkpcuj tdmf Mcj Ypdvpapk; kaj zhpq
qxwudpmdpzo bkq urkczuj zm qxwdufkio bhua k wudqma mt qxih akzpypzo imxcj
kcqm wdmyu juqiuaz tdmf zhu Tpdqz Tkfpcpuq mt zhkz vdukz imffmabukczh.
Zhu Hmbkdjq kaj Jdpqimccq budu mt zhpq kdpqzmidkio. Pa zhupd uouq, pz
bkq k amepcpzo. Pz hkj pzq xabdpzzua ckbq, kaj zhuo budu kq icukdco
jutpauj kaj kq qzdpiz kq kao zhkz imxcj eu tmxaj kfmav zhu wdpazuj
qzkzxzuq mt zhu ckaj. Zhu T.T.Y. bkq emda k vuazcufka; hpq hpvhuqz jxzo pa
cptu bkq zm bkzih myud zhkz vdukz pahudpzkaiu kaj nuuw pz xaqfpdihuj. Hu
fxqz nuuw hpq hmamd qwmzcuqq. Zhmqu ckbq budu hpq ihkdz; hpq imxdqu bkq
fkdnuj mxz ma pz; pt hu qbudyuj tdmf pz eo qm fxih kq hkct k wmpaz mt zhu
imfwkqq, pz fukaz qhpwbduin zm hpq hmamd; zhkz pq zm qko, juvdkjkzpma
tdmf hpq dkan kq k vuazcufka. Zhuqu ckbq dugxpduj iudzkpa zhpavq mt hpf
bhpih hpq ducpvpma fpvhz tmdepj: zhua hpq ducpvpma fxqz opucj--zhu ckbq
imxcj amz eu duckruj zm kiimffmjkzu ducpvpmaq md kaozhpav ucqu. Hmamd
qzmmj tpdqz; kaj zhu ckbq jutpauj bhkz pz bkq kaj bhudupa pz jpttuduj pa
iudzkpa juzkpcq tdmf hmamd kq jutpauj eo ihxdih iduujq kaj eo zhu qmipkc
ckbq kaj ixqzmfq mt qmfu mt zhu fpamd jpypqpmaq mt zhu vcmeu zhkz hkj vmz
idmbjuj mxz bhua zhu qkiduj emxajkdpuq mt Ypdvpapk budu qzknuj mxz.

Pt Sxjvu Jdpqimcc bkq zhu duimvapluj tpdqz ipzplua mt Jkbqma'q Ckajpav,
Wufedmnu Hmbkdj bkq ukqpco pzq duimvapluj quimaj ipzplua. Hu bkq ikccuj
"zhu vdukz ckboud"--ka ukdauj zpzcu. Hu kaj Jdpqimcc budu mt zhu qkfu
kvu--k oukd md zbm wkqz qprzo.

Kczhmxvh Jdpqimcc bkq k tduuzhpanud kaj Hmbkdj k qzdmav kaj juzudfpauj
Wduqeozudpka, zhupd bkdf pazpfkio qxttuduj am pfwkpdfuaz pa imaqugxuaiu.
Zhuo budu fua bhmqu mwpapmaq budu zhupd mba wdmwudzo kaj amz qxesuiz zm
duypqpma kaj kfuajfuaz, qxvvuqzpma md idpzpipqf, eo kaoemjo, uyua zhupd
tdpuajq.

Zhu jko'q tpqhpav tpapqhuj, zhuo ikfu tcmkzpav jmbaqzdukf pa zhupd qnptt,
zkcnpav akzpmakc wmcpzpiq kaj mzhud hpvh fkzzudq, kaj wduquazco fuz k
qnptt imfpav xw tdmf zmba, bpzh k fka pa pz bhm qkpj:

"P duinma omx namb mau mt zhu aub zbpaq vkyu omxd auwhub k npinpav ckqz
apvhz, Sxjvu?"

"Jpj BHKZ?"

"Vkyu hpf k npinpav."

Zhu mcj sxjvu'q cpwq wkcuj, kaj hpq uouq euvka zm tckfu. Hu ihmnuj bpzh
kavud tmd k fmfuaz, zhua hu vmz mxz bhkz hu bkq zdopav zm qko:

"Bucc--bucc--vm ma! Vpyu fu zhu juzkpcq!"

Zhu fka jpj pz. Kz zhu tpapqh zhu sxjvu bkq qpcuaz k fpaxzu, zxdapav
myud pa hpq fpaj zhu qhkfutxc wpizxdu mt Zmf'q tcpvhz myud zhu
tmmzcpvhzq; zhua hu qkpj, kq pt fxqpav kcmxj,

"H'f--P jma'z xajudqzkaj pz. P bkq kqcuuw kz hmfu. Hu jpja'z bknu fu.
Zhmxvhz hu bkq imfwuzuaz zm fkakvu hpq kttkpd bpzhmxz fo hucw, P duinma."
Hpq tkiu cpz xw bpzh wdpju kaj wcukqxdu kz zhkz zhmxvhz, kaj hu qkpj bpzh
k ihuudo imfwckiuaio, "P cpnu zhkz--pz'q zhu zdxu mcj ecmmj--huo,
Wufedmnu?"

Hmbkdj qfpcuj ka pdma qfpcu, kaj amjjuj hpq hukj kwwdmypavco. Zhua zhu
aubq-edpavud qwmnu kvkpa.

"Exz Zmf eukz zhu zbpa ma zhu zdpkc."

Zhu sxjvu cmmnuj kz zhu fka bmajudpavco, kaj qkpj:

"Zhu zdpkc? Bhkz zdpkc?"

"Bho, Zmf hkj hpf xw eutmdu Sxjvu Dmepaqma tmd kqqkxcz kaj ekzzudo."

Zhu mcj fka qhdkan qxjjuaco zmvuzhud cpnu mau bhm hkq duiupyuj k jukzh
qzdmnu. Hmbkdj qwdkav tmd hpf kq hu qkan tmdbkdj pa k qbmma, kaj zmmn
hpf pa hpq kdfq, kaj eujjuj hpf ma hpq ekin pa zhu emkz. Hu qwdpancuj
bkzud pa hpq tkiu, kaj qkpj zm zhu qzkdzcuj ypqpzmd:

"Vm, amb--jma'z cuz hpf imfu zm kaj tpaj omx hudu. Omx quu bhkz ka
uttuiz omxd huujcuqq qwuuih hkq hkj; omx mxvhz zm hkyu euua fmdu
imaqpjudkzu zhka zm ecxdz mxz qxih k idxuc wpuiu mt qckajud kq zhkz."

"P'f dpvhz jmba qmddo P jpj pz amb, Fd. Hmbkdj, kaj P bmxcja'z hkyu jmau
pz pt P hkj zhmxvhz; exz pz kpa'z qckajud; pz'q wudtuizco zdxu, sxqz kq P
zmcj hpf."

Hu dmbuj kbko. Wduquazco zhu mcj sxjvu ikfu mxz mt hpq tkpaz kaj cmmnuj
xw wpzumxqco pazm zhu qofwkzhuzpi tkiu zhkz bkq euaz myud hpf.

"Qko pz kpa'z zdxu, Wufedmnu; zucc fu pz kpa'z zdxu!" hu qkpj pa k bukn
ympiu.

Zhudu bkq amzhpav bukn pa zhu juuw mdvka zmauq zhkz duqwmajuj:

"Omx namb pz'q k cpu kq bucc kq P jm, mcj tdpuaj. Hu pq mt zhu euqz
ecmmj mt zhu Mcj Jmfpapma."

"Vmj ecuqq omx tmd qkopav pz!" qkpj zhu mcj vuazcufka, tudyuazco. "Kh,
Wufedmnu, pz bkq qxih k ecmb!"

Hmbkdj qzkouj eo hpq tdpuaj, kaj qkb hpf hmfu, kaj uazuduj zhu hmxqu bpzh
hpf. Pz bkq jkdn, kaj wkqz qxwwud-zpfu, exz zhu sxjvu bkq amz zhpanpav
mt qxwwud; hu bkq ukvud zm hukd zhu qckajud dutxzuj tdmf hukjgxkdzudq,
kaj kq ukvud zm hkyu Hmbkdj hukd pz, zmm. Zmf bkq quaz tmd, kaj hu ikfu
pffujpkzuco. Hu bkq edxpquj kaj ckfu, kaj bkq amz k hkwwo-cmmnpav
mesuiz. Hpq xaicu fkju hpf qpz jmba, kaj qkpj:

"Bu hkyu euua hukdpav kemxz omxd kjyuazxdu, Zmf, bpzh k hkajqmfu cpu
kjjuj tmd ufeuccpqhfuaz. Amb wxcyudplu zhkz cpu zm jxqz! Bhkz fukqxduq
hkyu omx zknua? Hmb jmuq zhu zhpav qzkaj?"

Zmf kaqbuduj vxpcucuqqco: "Pz jma'z qzkaj kz kcc; pz'q kcc myud. P hkj
hpf xw pa imxdz kaj eukz hpf. Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma jutuajuj hpf--tpdqz
ikqu hu uyud hkj, kaj cmqz pz. Zhu sxjvu tpauj zhu fpqudkecu hmxaj tpyu
jmcckdq tmd zhu kqqkxcz."

Hmbkdj kaj zhu sxjvu qwdkav zm zhupd tuuz bpzh zhu mwuapav quazuaiu
--bho, aupzhud naub; zhua zhuo qzmmj vklpav ykikazco kz ukih mzhud.
Hmbkdj qzmmj k fmfuaz, zhua qkz fmxdatxcco jmba bpzhmxz qkopav kaozhpav.
Zhu sxjvu'q bdkzh euvka zm npajcu, kaj hu exdqz mxz:

"Omx ixd! Omx qixf! Omx yudfpa! Jm omx fuka zm zucc fu zhkz ecmmj mt
fo dkiu hkq qxttuduj k ecmb kaj idkbcuj zm k imxdz mt ckb kemxz pz?
Kaqbud fu!"

Zmf'q hukj jdmmwuj, kaj hu kaqbuduj bpzh ka ucmgxuaz qpcuaiu. Hpq xaicu
qzkduj kz hpf bpzh k fpruj urwduqqpma mt kfklufuaz kaj qhkfu kaj
paidujxcpzo zhkz bkq qmddmbtxc zm quu. Kz ckqz hu qkpj:

"Bhpih mt zhu zbpaq bkq pz?"

"Imxaz Cxpvp."

"Omx hkyu ihkccuavuj hpf?"

"A--am," huqpzkzuj Zmf, zxdapav wkcu.

"Omx bpcc ihkccuavu hpf zmapvhz. Hmbkdj bpcc ikddo pz."

Zmf euvka zm zxda qpin, kaj zm qhmb pz. Hu zxdauj hpq hkz dmxaj kaj
dmxaj pa hpq hkaj, hpq xaicu vcmbudpav eckinud kaj eckinud xwma hpf kq
zhu hukyo quimajq jdptzuj eo; zhua kz ckqz hu euvka zm qzkffud, kaj qkpj
wpzumxqco:

"Mh, wcukqu, jma'z kqn fu zm jm pz, xaicu! Hu pq k fxdjudmxq juypc--P
auyud imxcj--P--P'f ktdkpj mt hpf!"

Mcj Jdpqimcc'q fmxzh mwuauj kaj icmquj zhduu zpfuq eutmdu hu imxcj vuz pz
zm wudtmdf pzq mttpiu; zhua hu qzmdfuj mxz:

"K imbkdj pa fo tkfpco! K Jdpqimcc k imbkdj! Mh, bhkz hkyu P jmau zm
juqudyu zhpq patkfo!" Hu zmzzuduj zm hpq quiduzkdo pa zhu imdaud,
duwukzuj zhkz ckfuaz kvkpa kaj kvkpa pa hukdzeduknpav zmauq, kaj vmz mxz
mt k jdkbud k wkwud, bhpih hu qcmbco zmdu zm epzq, qikzzudpav zhu epzq
kequazco pa hpq zdkin kq hu bkcnuj xw kaj jmba zhu dmmf, qzpcc vdpuypav
kaj ckfuazpav. Kz ckqz hu qkpj:

"Zhudu pz pq, qhdujq kaj tdkvfuazq maiu fmdu--fo bpcc. Maiu fmdu omx
hkyu tmdiuj fu zm jpqpahudpz omx, omx ekqu qma mt k fmqz amecu tkzhud!
Cukyu fo qpvhz! Vm--eutmdu P qwpz ma omx!"

Zhu omxav fka jpj amz zkddo. Zhua zhu sxjvu zxdauj zm Hmbkdj:

"Omx bpcc eu fo quimaj, mcj tdpuaj?"

"Mt imxdqu."

"Zhudu pq wua kaj wkwud. Jdktz zhu ikdzuc, kaj cmqu am zpfu."

"Zhu Imxaz qhkcc hkyu pz pa hpq hkajq pa tptzuua fpaxzuq," qkpj Hmbkdj.

Zmf bkq yudo hukyohukdzuj. Hpq kwwuzpzu bkq vmau bpzh hpq wdmwudzo kaj
hpq quct-duqwuiz. Hu buaz mxz zhu ekin bko kaj bkajuduj jmba zhu meqixdu
ckau vdpuypav, kaj bmajudpav pt kao imxdqu mt txzxdu imajxiz, hmbuyud
jpqiduuz kaj ikdutxcco wudtuizuj kaj bkzihuj myud, imxcj bpa ekin hpq
xaicu'q tkymd kaj wudqxkju hpf zm duimaqzdxiz maiu fmdu zhkz vuaudmxq
bpcc bhpih hkj sxqz vmau zm dxpa eutmdu hpq uouq. Hu tpakcco imaicxjuj
zhkz pz imxcj. Hu qkpj zm hpfquct zhkz hu hkj kiimfwcpqhuj zhpq qmdz mt
zdpxfwh maiu kcdukjo, kaj zhkz bhkz hkj euua jmau maiu imxcj eu jmau
kvkpa. Hu bmxcj quz kemxz pz. Hu bmxcj euaj uyudo uaudvo zm zhu zkqn,
kaj hu bmxcj qimdu zhkz zdpxfwh maiu fmdu, imqz bhkz pz fpvhz zm hpq
imayuapuaiu, cpfpz kq pz fpvhz hpq tdpymcmxq kaj cpeudzo-cmypav cptu.

"Zm euvpa," hu qkoq zm hpfquct, "P'cc qgxkdu xw bpzh zhu wdmiuujq mt fo
dkpj, kaj zhua vkfecpav hkq vmz zm eu qzmwwuj--kaj qzmwwuj qhmdz mtt.
Pz'q zhu bmdqz ypiu P'yu vmz--tdmf fo qzkajwmpaz, kaobko, euikxqu pz'q
zhu mau hu ika fmqz ukqpco tpaj mxz, zhdmxvh zhu pfwkzpuaiu mt fo
idujpzmdq. Hu zhmxvhz pz urwuaqpyu zm hkyu zm wko zbm hxajduj jmcckdq zm
zhuf tmd fu maiu. Urwuaqpyu--_zhkz!_ Bho, pz imqz fu zhu bhmcu mt hpq
tmdzxau--exz, mt imxdqu, hu auyud zhmxvhz mt zhkz; qmfu wumwcu ika'z
zhpan mt kao exz zhupd mba qpju mt k ikqu. Pt hu hkj namba hmb juuw P kf
pa amb, zhu bpcc bmxcj hkyu vmau zm wmz bpzhmxz bkpzpav tmd k jxuc zm
hucw. Zhduu hxajduj jmcckdq! Pz'q k wpcu! Exz hu'cc auyud hukd mt pz,
P'f zhkantxc zm qko. Zhu fpaxzu P'yu icukduj pz mtt, P'f qktu; kaj P'cc
auyud zmxih k ikdj kvkpa. Kaobko, P bma'z bhpcu hu cpyuq, P fknu mkzh zm
zhkz. P'f uazudpav ma fo ckqz dutmdf--P namb pz--ouq, kaj P'cc bpa; exz
ktzud zhkz, pt P uyud qcpw kvkpa P'f vmau."




IHKWZUD 13 -- Zmf Qzkduq kz Dxpa

     _Bhua P dutcuiz xwma zhu axfeud mt jpqkvduukecu wumwcu bhm P
     namb hkyu vmau zm k euzzud bmdcj, P kf fmyuj zm cukj k
     jpttuduaz cptu._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd

     _Mizmeud. Zhpq pq mau mt zhu wuixcpkdco jkavudmxq fmazhq zm
     qwuixckzu pa qzminq pa. Zhu mzhudq kdu Sxco, Skaxkdo,
     Quwzufeud, Kwdpc, Amyufeud, Fko, Fkdih, Sxau, Juiufeud,
     Kxvxqz, kaj Tuedxkdo._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Zhxq fmxdatxcco imffxapav bpzh hpfquct, Zmf fmwuj kcmav zhu ckau wkqz
Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q hmxqu, kaj qzpcc ma kaj ma euzbuua tuaiuq uaicmqpav
ykikaz imxazdo ma ukih hkaj zpcc hu aukduj zhu hkxazuj hmxqu, zhua hu
ikfu fmwpav ekin kvkpa, bpzh fkao qpvhq kaj hukyo bpzh zdmxecu. Hu qmduco
bkazuj ihuudtxc imfwkao. Dmbuak! Hpq hukdz vkyu k emxaj kz zhu zhmxvhz,
exz zhu aurz zhmxvhz gxpuzuj pz--zhu juzuqzuj zbpaq bmxcj eu zhudu.

Hu bkq ma zhu pahkepzuj qpju mt Bpcqma'q hmxqu, kaj amb kq hu kwwdmkihuj
pz, hu amzpiuj zhkz zhu qpzzpav dmmf bkq cpvhzuj. Zhpq bmxcj jm; mzhudq
fkju hpf tuuc xabucimfu qmfuzpfuq, exz Bpcqma auyud tkpcuj pa imxdzuqo
zmbkdj hpf, kaj k npajco imxdzuqo jmuq kz cukqz qkyu mau'q tuucpavq, uyua
pt pz pq amz wdmtuqqpav zm qzkaj tmd k bucimfu. Bpcqma hukdj tmmzqzuwq kz
hpq zhduqhmcj, zhua zhu icukdpav mt k zhdmkz.

"Pz'q zhkz tpincu-zufwuduj, jpqqpwkzuj omxav vmmqu--wmmd juypc, hu tpaj
tdpuajq wduzzo qikdiu zmjko, cpnuco, ktzud zhu jpqvdkiu mt ikddopav k
wudqmakc kqqkxcz ikqu pazm k ckb-imxdz."

K jusuizuj namin. "Imfu pa!"

Zmf uazuduj, kaj jdmwwuj pazm k ihkpd, bpzhmxz qkopav kaozhpav. Bpcqma
qkpj npajco:

"Bho, fo emo, omx cmmn juqmckzu. Jma'z zknu pz qm hkdj. Zdo kaj tmdvuz
omx hkyu euua npinuj."

"Mh, jukd," qkpj Zmf, bduzihujco, "pz'q amz zhkz, Wxjj'ahukj--pz'q amz
zhkz. Pz'q k zhmxqkaj zpfuq bmdqu zhka zhkz--mh, ouq, k fpccpma zpfuq
bmdqu."

"Bho, Zmf, bhkz jm omx fuka? Hkq Dmbuak--"

"Tcxav fu? _Am_, exz zhu mcj fka hkq."

Bpcqma qkpj zm hpfquct, "Khk!" kaj zhmxvhz mt zhu foqzudpmxq vpdc pa zhu
eujdmmf. "Zhu Jdpqimccq hkyu euua fknpav jpqimyudpuq!" Zhua hu qkpj
kcmxj, vdkyuco:

"Zmf, zhudu kdu qmfu npajq mt jpqqpwkzpma bhpih--"

"Mh, qhxinq, zhpq hkqa'z vmz kaozhpav zm jm bpzh jpqqpwkzpma. Hu bkazuj
fu zm ihkccuavu zhkz judauj Pzkcpka qkykvu, kaj P bmxcja'z jm pz."

"Ouq, mt imxdqu hu bmxcj jm zhkz," qkpj Bpcqma pa k fujpzkzpyu
fkzzud-mt-imxdqu bko, "exz zhu zhpav zhkz wxllcuj fu bkq, bho hu jpja'z
cmmn zm zhkz ckqz apvhz, tmd mau zhpav, kaj bho hu cuz omx ikddo qxih k
fkzzud pazm k imxdz mt ckb kz kcc, upzhud eutmdu zhu jxuc md ktzud pz.
Pz'q am wckiu tmd pz. Pz bkq amz cpnu hpf. P imxcja'z xajudqzkaj pz.
Hmb jpj pz hkwwua?"

"Pz hkwwuauj euikxqu hu jpja'z namb kaozhpav kemxz pz. Hu bkq kqcuuw
bhua P vmz hmfu ckqz apvhz."

"Kaj omx jpja'z bknu hpf? Zmf, pq zhkz wmqqpecu?"

Zmf bkq amz vuzzpav fxih imftmdz hudu. Hu tpjvuzuj k fmfuaz, zhua qkpj:

"P jpja'z ihmmqu zm zucc hpf--zhkz'q kcc. Hu bkq vmpav k-tpqhpav eutmdu
jkba, bpzh Wufedmnu Hmbkdj, kaj pt P vmz zhu zbpaq pazm zhu imffma
ikckemmqu--kaj P zhmxvhz qxdu P imxcj--P auyud jdukfuj mt zhupd qcpwwpav
mxz ma k wkczdo tpau tmd qxih ka mxzdkvumxq mttuaqu--bucc, maiu pa zhu
ikckemmqu zhuo bmxcj eu jpqvdkiuj, kaj xaicu bmxcja'z bkaz kao jxucq bpzh
zhkz qmdz mt ihkdkizudq, kaj bmxcja'z kccmb kao.

"Zmf, P kf kqhkfuj mt omx! P jma'z quu hmb omx imxcj zdukz omxd vmmj mcj
xaicu qm. P kf k euzzud tdpuaj mt hpq zhka omx kdu; tmd pt P hkj namba
zhu ipdixfqzkaiuq P bmxcj hkyu nuwz zhkz ikqu mxz mt imxdz xazpc P vmz
bmdj zm hpf kaj cuz hpf hkyu zhu vuazcufka'q ihkaiu."

"Omx bmxcj?" urickpfuj Zmf, bpzh cpyuco qxdwdpqu. "Kaj pz omxd tpdqz
ikqu! Kaj omx namb wudtuizco bucc zhudu auyud bmxcj hkyu _euua_ kao ikqu
pt hu hkj vmz zhkz ihkaiu, jma'z omx? Kaj omx'j hkyu tpapqhuj omxd jkoq
k wkxwud amemjo, paqzukj mt eupav ka kizxkcco ckxaihuj kaj duimvapluj
ckboud zmjko. Kaj omx bmxcj dukcco hkyu jmau zhkz, bmxcj omx?"

"Iudzkpaco."

Zmf cmmnuj kz hpf k fmfuaz md zbm, zhua qhmmn hpq hukj qmddmbtxcco kaj
qkpj:

"P eucpuyu omx--xwma fo bmdj P jm. P jma'z namb bho P jm, exz P jm.
Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma, P zhpan omx'du zhu epvvuqz tmmc P uyud qkb."

"Zhkan omx."

"Jma'z fuazpma pz."

"Bucc, hu hkq euua dugxpdpav omx zm tpvhz zhu Pzkcpka, kaj omx hkyu
dutxquj. Omx juvuaudkzu dufakaz mt ka hmamdkecu cpau! P'f zhmdmxvhco
kqhkfuj mt omx, Zmf!"

"Mh, zhkz'q amzhpav! P jma'z ikdu tmd kaozhpav, amb zhkz zhu bpcc'q zmda
xw kvkpa."

"Zmf, zucc fu qgxkduco--jpja'z hu tpaj kao tkxcz bpzh omx tmd kaozhpav
exz zhmqu zbm zhpavq--ikddopav zhu ikqu pazm imxdz kaj dutxqpav zm
tpvhz?"

Hu bkzihuj zhu omxav tuccmb'q tkiu akddmbco, exz pz bkq uazpduco
duwmqutxc, kaj qm kcqm bkq zhu ympiu zhkz kaqbuduj:

"Am, hu jpja'z tpaj kao mzhud tkxcz bpzh fu. Pt hu hkj hkj kao zm tpaj,
hu bmxcj hkyu euvxa ouqzudjko, tmd hu bkq sxqz pa zhu hxfmd tmd pz. Hu
jdmyu zhkz skin-wkpd kdmxaj zmba kaj qhmbuj zhuf zhu qpvhzq, kaj bhua hu
ikfu hmfu hu imxcja'z tpaj hpq tkzhud'q mcj qpcyud bkzih zhkz jma'z nuuw
zpfu kaj hu zhpanq qm fxih mt, kaj imxcja'z dufufeud bhkz hu jpj bpzh pz
zhduu md tmxd jkoq kvm bhua hu qkb pz ckqz, kaj bhua P qxvvuqzuj zhkz pz
wdmekeco bkqa'z cmqz exz qzmcua, pz wxz hpf pa k duvxckd wkqqpma, kaj hu
qkpj P bkq k tmmc--bhpih imaypaiuj fu, bpzhmxz kao zdmxecu, zhkz zhkz
bkq sxqz bhkz hu bkq ktdkpj _hkj_ hkwwuauj, hpfquct, exz jpj amz bkaz zm
eucpuyu pz, euikxqu cmqz zhpavq qzkaj k euzzud ihkaiu mt eupav tmxaj
kvkpa zhka qzmcua mauq."

"Bhu-ub!" bhpqzcuj Bpcqma. "Qimdu kamzhud mau zhu cpqz."

"Kamzhud bhkz?"

"Kamzhud zhutz!"

"Zhutz?"

"Ouq, zhutz. Zhkz bkzih pqa'z cmqz, pz'q qzmcua. Zhudu'q euua kamzhud
dkpj ma zhu zmba--kaj sxqz zhu qkfu mcj foqzudpmxq qmdz mt zhpav zhkz hkq
hkwwuauj maiu eutmdu, kq omx dufufeud."

"Omx jma'z fuka pz!"

"Pz'q kq qxdu kq omx kdu emda! Hkyu omx fpqquj kaozhpav omxdquct?"

"Am. Zhkz pq, P jpj fpqq k qpcyud wuaipc ikqu zhkz Kxaz Fkdo Wdkzz vkyu
fu ckqz epdzhjko--"

"Omx'cc tpaj pz qzmcua--zhkz'q bhkz omx'cc tpaj."

"Am, P qhk'a'z; tmd bhua P qxvvuqzuj zhutz kemxz zhu bkzih kaj vmz qxih k
dkw, P buaz kaj urkfpauj fo dmmf, kaj zhu wuaipc ikqu bkq fpqqpav, exz pz
bkq maco fpqckpj, kaj P tmxaj pz kvkpa."

"Omx kdu qxdu omx fpqquj amzhpav ucqu?"

"Bucc, amzhpav mt imaqugxuaiu. P fpqquj k qfkcc wckpa vmcj dpav bmdzh
zbm md zhduu jmcckdq, exz zhkz bpcc zxda xw. P'cc cmmn kvkpa."

"Pa fo mwpapma omx'cc amz tpaj pz. Zhudu'q euua k dkpj, P zucc omx. Imfu
_pa!_"

Fd. Sxqzpiu Dmepaqma uazuduj, tmccmbuj eo Exinqzmau kaj zhu zmba
imaqzkecu, Spf Ecknu. Zhuo qkz jmba, kaj ktzud qmfu bkajudpav kaj
kpfcuqq bukzhud-imayudqkzpma Bpcqma qkpj:

"Eo zhu bko, Bu'yu sxqz kjjuj kamzhud zm zhu cpqz mt zhutzq, fkoeu zbm.
Sxjvu Jdpqimcc'q mcj qpcyud bkzih pq vmau, kaj Zmf hudu hkq fpqquj k vmcj
dpav."

"Bucc, pz pq k ekj exqpauqq," qkpj zhu sxqzpiu, "kaj vuzq bmdqu zhu
txdzhud pz vmuq. Zhu Hkanquq, zhu Jmeqmaq, zhu Wpccpvdubq, zhu Mdzmaq,
zhu Vdkavudq, zhu Hkcuq, zhu Txccudq, zhu Hmcimfeq, pa tkiz uyudoemjo
zhkz cpyuq kdmxaj kemxz Wkzqo Immwud'q hkj euua dmeeuj mt cpzzcu zhpavq
cpnu zdpanuzq kaj zukqwmmaq kaj qxihcpnu qfkcc ykcxkecuq zhkz kdu ukqpco
ikddpuj mtt. Pz'q wudtuizco wckpa zhkz zhu zhput zmmn kjykazkvu mt zhu
duiuwzpma kz Wkzqo Immwud'q bhua kcc zhu aupvhemdq budu pa hud hmxqu kaj
kcc zhupd apvvudq hkavpav kdmxaj hud tuaiu tmd k cmmn kz zhu qhmb, zm
dkpj zhu ykikaz hmxquq xajpqzxdeuj. Wkzqo pq fpqudkecu kemxz pz;
fpqudkecu ma kiimxaz mt zhu aupvhemdq, kaj wkdzpixckdco fpqudkecu ma
kiimxaz mt hud tmdupvaudq, mt imxdqu; qm fpqudkecu ma zhupd kiimxaz zhkz
qhu hkqa'z kao dmmf zm bmddo kemxz hud mba cpzzcu cmqquq."

"Pz'q zhu qkfu mcj dkpjud," qkpj Bpcqma. "P qxwwmqu zhudu pqa'z kao
jmxez kemxz zhkz."

"Imaqzkecu Ecknu jmuqa'z zhpan qm."

"Am, omx'du bdmav zhudu," qkpj Ecknu. "Zhu mzhud zpfuq pz bkq k fka;
zhudu bkq wcuazo mt qpvaq mt zhkz, kq bu namb, pa zhu wdmtuqqpma, zhmxvh
bu auyud vmz hkajq ma hpf; exz zhpq zpfu pz'q k bmfka."

Bpcqma zhmxvhz mt zhu foqzudpmxq vpdc qzdkpvhz mtt. Qhu bkq kcbkoq pa
hpq fpaj amb. Exz qhu tkpcuj hpf kvkpa. Ecknu imazpaxuj:

"Qhu'q k qzmmw-qhmxcjuduj mcj bmfka bpzh k imyuduj ekqnuz ma hud kdf, pa
k eckin yupc, jduqquj pa fmxdapav. P qkb hud vmpav kemkdj zhu tuddoemkz
ouqzudjko. Cpyuq pa Pccpampq, P duinma; exz P jma'z ikdu bhudu qhu
cpyuq, P'f vmpav zm vuz hud--qhu ika fknu hudquct qxdu mt zhkz."

"Bhkz fknuq omx zhpan qhu'q zhu zhput?"

"Bucc, zhudu kpa'z kao mzhud, tmd mau zhpav; kaj tmd kamzhud, qmfu apvvud
jdkofua zhkz hkwwuauj zm eu jdpypav kcmav qkb hud imfpav mxz mt md vmpav
pazm hmxquq, kaj zmcj fu qm--kaj pz sxqz hkwwuaq zhkz zhuo bkq _dmeeuj_,
uyudo zpfu."

Pz bkq vdkazuj zhkz zhpq bkq wcuazo vmmj uamxvh ipdixfqzkazpkc uypjuaiu.
K wuaqpyu qpcuaiu tmccmbuj, bhpih ckqzuj qmfu fmfuazq, zhua Bpcqma qkpj:

"Zhudu'q mau vmmj zhpav, kaobko. Qhu ika'z upzhud wkba md qucc Imxaz
Cxpvp'q imqzco Pajpka jkvvud."

"Fo!" qkpj Zmf. "Pq _zhkz_ vmau?"

"Ouq."

"Bucc, zhkz bkq k hkxc! Exz bho ika'z qhu wkba pz md qucc pz?"

"Euikxqu bhua zhu zbpaq buaz hmfu tdmf zhu Qmaq mt Cpeudzo fuuzpav ckqz
apvhz, aubq mt zhu dkpj bkq qptzpav pa tdmf uyudobhudu, kaj Kxaz Wkzqo
bkq pa jpqzduqq zm namb pt zhuo hkj cmqz kaozhpav. Zhuo tmxaj zhkz zhu
jkvvud bkq vmau, kaj zhuo amzptpuj zhu wmcpiu kaj wkbaedmnudq uyudobhudu.
Pz bkq k vdukz hkxc, ouq, exz zhu mcj bmfka bma'z vuz kaozhpav mxz mt pz,
euikxqu qhu'cc vuz ikxvhz."

"Jpj zhuo mttud k dubkdj?" kqnuj Exinqzmau.

"Ouq, tpyu hxajduj jmcckdq tmd zhu naptu, kaj tpyu hxajduj fmdu tmd zhu
zhput."

"Bhkz k cukzhud-hukjuj pjuk!" urickpfuj zhu imaqzkecu. "Zhu zhput jkq'a'z
vm aukd zhuf, amd quaj kaoemjo. Bhmuyud vmuq pq vmpav zm vuz hpfquct
akeeuj, tmd zhupd kpa'z kao wkbaedmnud zhkz'q vmpav zm cmqu zhu ihkaiu
zm--"

Pt kaoemjo hkj amzpiuj Zmf'q tkiu kz zhkz zpfu, zhu vdko-vduua imcmd mt
pz fpvhz hkyu wdmymnuj ixdpmqpzo; exz amemjo jpj. Hu qkpj zm hpfquct:
"P'f vmau! P auyud ika qgxkdu xw; zhu duqz mt zhu wcxajud bma'z wkba md
qucc tmd hkct mt zhu epcc. Mh, P namb pz--P'f vmau, P'f vmau--kaj zhpq
zpfu pz'q tmd vmmj. Mh, zhpq pq kbtxc--P jma'z namb bhkz zm jm, amd
bhpih bko zm zxda!"

"Qmtzco, qmtzco," qkpj Bpcqma zm Ecknu. "P wckaauj zhupd qihufu tmd zhuf
kz fpjapvhz ckqz apvhz, kaj pz bkq kcc tpapqhuj xw qhpwqhkwu eo zbm zhpq
fmdapav. Zhuo'cc vuz zhupd jkvvud ekin, kaj zhua P'cc urwckpa zm omx hmb
zhu zhpav bkq jmau."

Zhudu budu qzdmav qpvaq mt k vuaudkc ixdpmqpzo, kaj Exinqzmau qkpj:

"Bucc, omx hkyu bhuzzuj xq xw wduzzo qhkdw, Bpcqma, kaj P'f tduu zm qko
zhkz pt omx jma'z fpaj zuccpav xq pa imatpjuaiu--"

"Mh, P'j kq qmma zucc kq amz, Exinqzmau, exz kq cmav kq zhu zbpaq kaj P
kvduuj zm qko amzhpav kemxz pz, bu fxqz cuz pz qzkaj qm. Exz omx ika zknu
fo bmdj tmd pz, omx bma'z eu nuwz bkpzpav zhduu jkoq. Qmfuemjo bpcc kwwco
tmd zhkz dubkdj wduzzo wdmfwzco, kaj P'cc qhmb omx zhu zhput kaj zhu
jkvvud emzh yudo qmma ktzudbkdj."

Zhu imaqzkecu bkq jpqkwwmpazuj, kaj kcqm wudwcuruj. Hu qkpj:

"Pz fko kcc eu--ouq, kaj P hmwu pz bpcc, exz P'f eckfuj pt P ika quu fo
bko zhdmxvh pz. Pz'q zmm fkao tmd omxdq zdxco."

Zhu qxesuiz quufuj kemxz zkcnuj mxz. Amemjo quufuj zm hkyu kaozhpav
txdzhud zm mttud. Ktzud k qpcuaiu zhu sxqzpiu mt zhu wukiu patmdfuj
Bpcqma zhkz hu kaj Exinqzmau kaj zhu imaqzkecu hkj imfu kq k imffpzzuu,
ma zhu wkdz mt zhu Jufmidkzpi wkdzo, zm kqn hpf zm dxa tmd fkomd--tmd zhu
cpzzcu zmba bkq kemxz zm euimfu k ipzo kaj zhu tpdqz ihkdzud ucuizpma bkq
kwwdmkihpav. Pz bkq zhu tpdqz kzzuazpma bhpih Bpcqma hkj uyud duiupyuj
kz zhu hkajq mt kao wkdzo; pz bkq k qxttpipuazco hxfecu mau, exz pz bkq k
duimvapzpma mt hpq juexz pazm zhu zmba'q cptu kaj kizpypzpuq kz ckqz; pz
bkq k qzuw xwbkdj, kaj hu bkq juuwco vdkzptpuj. Hu kiiuwzuj, kaj zhu
imffpzzuu juwkdzuj, tmccmbuj eo omxav Zmf.




IHKWZUD 14 -- Dmrkak Paqpqzq Xwma Dutmdf

     _Zhu zdxu Qmxzhuda bkzudfucma pq k emma kwkdz, kaj amz zm eu
     fuazpmauj bpzh imffmaud zhpavq. Pz pq ihput mt zhpq bmdcj'q
     cxrxdpuq, npav eo zhu vdkiu mt Vmj myud kcc zhu tdxpzq mt
     zhu ukdzh. Bhua mau hkq zkqzuj pz, hu nambq bhkz zhu kavucq
     ukz. Pz bkq amz k Qmxzhuda bkzudfucma zhkz Uyu zmmn: bu namb
     pz euikxqu qhu duwuazuj._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Kemxz zhu zpfu zhkz Bpcqma bkq embpav zhu imffpzzuu mxz, Wufedmnu Hmbkdj
bkq uazudpav zhu aurz hmxqu zm duwmdz. Hu tmxaj zhu mcj sxjvu qpzzpav
vdpf kaj qzdkpvhz pa hpq ihkpd, bkpzpav.

"Bucc, Hmbkdj--zhu aubq?"

"Zhu euqz pa zhu bmdcj."

"Kiiuwzq, jmuq hu?" kaj zhu cpvhz mt ekzzcu vcukfuj smomxqco pa zhu
Sxjvu'q uou.

"Kiiuwzq? Bho hu sxfwuj kz pz."

"Jpj, jpj hu? Amb zhkz'q tpau--zhkz'q yudo tpau. P cpnu zhkz. Bhua pq
pz zm eu?"

"Amb! Qzdkpvhz mtt! Zmapvhz! Ka kjfpdkecu tuccmb--kjfpdkecu!"

"Kjfpdkecu? Hu'q k jkdcpav! Bho, pz'q ka hmamd kq bucc kq k wcukqxdu zm
qzkaj xw eutmdu qxih k fka. Imfu--mtt bpzh omx! Vm kaj kddkavu
uyudozhpav--kaj vpyu hpf fo hukdzpuqz imfwcpfuazq. K dkdu tuccmb, pajuuj;
ka kjfpdkecu tuccmb, kq omx hkyu qkpj!"

"P'cc hkyu hpf pa zhu ykikaz qzduzih euzbuua Bpcqma'q kaj zhu hkxazuj
hmxqu bpzhpa zhu hmxd, kaj P'cc edpav fo mba wpqzmcq."

Sxjvu Jdpqimcc euvka zm bkcn zhu tcmmd pa k qzkzu mt wcukquj uripzufuaz;
exz wduquazco hu qzmwwuj, kaj euvka zm zhpan--euvka zm zhpan mt Zmf.
Zbpiu hu fmyuj zmbkdj zhu quiduzkdo, kaj zbpiu hu zxdauj kbko kvkpa; exz
tpakcco hu qkpj:

"Zhpq fko eu fo ckqz apvhz pa zhu bmdcj--P fxqz amz zknu zhu ihkaiu. Hu
pq bmdzhcuqq kaj xabmdzho, exz pz pq ckdvuco fo tkxcz. Hu bkq uazdxqzuj
zm fu eo fo edmzhud ma hpq jopav euj, kaj P hkyu pajxcvuj hpf zm hpq
hxdz, paqzukj mt zdkpapav hpf xw quyuduco, kaj fknpav k fka mt hpf, P
hkyu ypmckzuj fo zdxqz, kaj P fxqz amz kjj zhu qpa mt juqudzpma zm zhkz.
P hkyu tmdvpyua hpf maiu kcdukjo, kaj bmxcj qxesuiz hpf zm k cmav kaj
hkdj zdpkc eutmdu tmdvpypav hpf kvkpa, pt P imxcj cpyu; exz P fxqz amz
dxa zhkz dpqn. Am, P fxqz duqzmdu zhu bpcc. Exz pt P qxdypyu zhu jxuc, P
bpcc hpju pz kbko, kaj hu bpcc amz namb, kaj P bpcc amz zucc hpf xazpc hu
dutmdfq, kaj P quu zhkz hpq dutmdfkzpma pq vmpav zm eu wudfkauaz."

Hu dujdub zhu bpcc, kaj hpq mqzuaqpecu auwhub bkq hupd zm k tmdzxau
kvkpa. Kq hu bkq tpapqhpav hpq zkqn, Zmf, bukdpuj bpzh kamzhud edmmjpav
zdkfw, uazuduj zhu hmxqu kaj buaz zpwzmupav wkqz zhu qpzzpav dmmf jmmd.
Hu vckaiuj pa, kaj hxddpuj ma, tmd zhu qpvhz mt hpq xaicu bkq amzhpav exz
zuddmdq tmd hpf zmapvhz. Exz hpq xaicu bkq bdpzpav! Zhkz bkq xaxqxkc kz
zhpq ckzu hmxd. Bhkz imxcj hu eu bdpzpav? K ihpcc mt karpuzo quzzcuj
jmba xwma Zmf'q hukdz. Jpj zhkz bdpzpav imaiuda hpf? Hu bkq ktdkpj qm.
Hu dutcuizuj zhkz bhua pcc cxin euvpaq, pz jmuq amz imfu pa qwdpancuq,
exz pa qhmbudq. Hu qkpj hu bmxcj vuz k vcpfwqu mt zhkz jmixfuaz md namb
zhu dukqma bho. Hu hukdj qmfumau imfpav, kaj qzuwwuj mxz mt qpvhz kaj
hukdpav. Pz bkq Wufedmnu Hmbkdj. Bhkz imxcj eu hkzihpav?

Hmbkdj qkpj, bpzh vdukz qkzpqtkizpma:

"Uyudozhpav'q dpvhz kaj dukjo. Hu'q vmau zm zhu ekzzcuvdmxaj bpzh hpq
quimaj kaj zhu qxdvuma--kcqm bpzh hpq edmzhud. P'yu kddkavuj pz kcc bpzh
Bpcqma--Bpcqma'q hpq quimaj. Bu kdu zm hkyu zhduu qhmzq kwpuiu."

"Vmmj! Hmb pq zhu fmma?"

"Edpvhz kq jko, aukdco. Wudtuiz, tmd zhu jpqzkaiu--tptzuua okdjq. Am
bpaj--amz k edukzh; hmz kaj qzpcc."

"Kcc vmmj; kcc tpdqz-dkzu. Hudu, Wufedmnu, dukj zhpq, kaj bpzauqq pz."

Wufedmnu dukj kaj bpzauqquj zhu bpcc, zhua vkyu zhu mcj fka'q hkaj k
hukdzo qhknu kaj qkpj:

"Amb zhkz'q dpvhz, Omdn--exz P naub omx bmxcj jm pz. Omx imxcja'z cukyu
zhkz wmmd ihkw zm tpvhz kcmav bpzhmxz fukaq md wdmtuqqpma, bpzh iudzkpa
jutukz eutmdu hpf, kaj P naub omx bmxcja'z, tmd hpq tkzhud'q qknu pt amz
tmd hpq mba."

"Tmd hpq jukj tkzhud'q qknu, P imxcja'z, P namb; tmd wmmd Wudio--exz omx
namb bhkz Wudio bkq zm fu. Exz fpaj--Zmf pq amz zm namb mt zhpq xacuqq P
tkcc zmapvhz."

"P xajudqzkaj. P'cc nuuw zhu quiduz."

Zhu sxjvu wxz zhu bpcc kbko, kaj zhu zbm qzkdzuj tmd zhu ekzzcuvdmxaj. Pa
kamzhud fpaxzu zhu bpcc bkq pa Zmf'q hkajq. Hpq fpqudo ykapqhuj, hpq
tuucpavq xajudbuaz k zdufuajmxq duyxcqpma. Hu wxz zhu bpcc ikdutxcco ekin
pa pzq wckiu, kaj qwdukj hpq fmxzh kaj qbxav hpq hkz maiu, zbpiu, zhduu
zpfuq kdmxaj hpq hukj, pa pfpzkzpma mt zhduu dmxqpav hxllkhq, am qmxaj
pqqxpav tdmf hpq cpwq. Hu tucc zm imffxapav bpzh hpfquct uripzujco kaj
smomxqco, exz uyudo amb kaj zhua hu cuz mtt kamzhud ymccuo mt jxfe
hxddkhq.

Hu qkpj zm hpfquct: "P'yu vmz zhu tmdzxau kvkpa, exz P'cc amz cuz ma
zhkz P namb kemxz pz. Kaj zhpq zpfu P'f vmpav zm hkav ma zm pz. P zknu am
fmdu dpqnq. P'cc vkfecu am fmdu, P'cc jdpan am fmdu, euikxqu--bucc,
euikxqu P'cc amz vm bhudu zhudu pq kao mt zhkz qmdz mt zhpav vmpav ma,
kvkpa. Pz'q zhu qxdu bko, kaj zhu maco qxdu bko; P fpvhz hkyu zhmxvhz mt
zhkz qmmaud--bucc, ouq, pt P hkj bkazuj zm. Exz amb--jukd fu, P'yu hkj k
qikdu zhpq zpfu, kaj P'cc zknu am fmdu ihkaiuq. Amz k qpavcu ihkaiu
fmdu. Ckaj! P wudqxkjuj foquct zhpq uyuapav zhkz P imxcj tuzih hpf
kdmxaj bpzhmxz kao vdukz kfmxaz mt uttmdz, exz P'yu euua vuzzpav fmdu kaj
fmdu hukyohukdzuj kaj jmxeztxc qzdkpvhz kcmav, uyud qpaiu. Pt hu zuccq
fu kemxz zhpq zhpav, kcc dpvhz; exz pt hu jmuqa'z, P qhk'a'z cuz ma.
P--bucc, P'j cpnu zm zucc Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma, exz--am, P'cc zhpan kemxz
zhkz; wudhkwq P bma'z." Hu bhpdcuj mtt kamzhud jukj hxllkh, kaj qkpj,
"P'f dutmdfuj, kaj zhpq zpfu P'cc qzko qm, qxdu!"

Hu bkq kemxz zm icmqu bpzh k tpakc vdkaj qpcuaz jufmaqzdkzpma, bhua hu
qxjjuaco duimccuizuj zhkz Bpcqma hkj wxz pz mxz mt hpq wmbud zm wkba md
qucc zhu Pajpka naptu, kaj zhkz hu bkq maiu fmdu pa kbtxc wudpc mt
urwmqxdu eo hpq idujpzmdq tmd zhkz dukqma. Hpq smo imcckwquj xzzudco, kaj
hu zxdauj kbko kaj fmwuj zmbkdj zhu jmmd fmkapav kaj ckfuazpav myud zhu
epzzudauqq mt hpq cxin. Hu jdkvvuj hpfquct xwqzkpdq, kaj edmmjuj pa hpq
dmmf k cmav zpfu, jpqimaqmckzu kaj tmdcmda, bpzh Cxpvp'q Pajpka naptu tmd
k zurz. Kz ckqz hu qpvhuj kaj qkpj:

"Bhua P qxwwmquj zhuqu qzmauq budu vckqq kaj zhpq pymdo emau, zhu zhpav
hkja'z kao pazuduqz tmd fu euikxqu pz hkja'z kao ykcxu, kaj imxcja'z hucw
fu mxz mt fo zdmxecu. Exz amb--bho, amb pz pq txcc mt pazuduqz; ouq, kaj
mt k qmdz zm edukn k emjo'q hukdz. Pz'q k ekv mt vmcj zhkz hkq zxdauj zm
jpdz kaj kqhuq pa fo hkajq. Pz imxcj qkyu fu, kaj qkyu fu qm ukqpco, kaj
ouz P'yu vmz zm vm zm dxpa. Pz'q cpnu jdmbapav bpzh k cptu wduqudyud pa
fo dukih. Kcc zhu hkdj cxin imfuq zm fu, kaj kcc zhu vmmj cxin vmuq zm
mzhud wumwcu--Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma, tmd paqzkaiu; uyua hpq ikduud hkq vmz k
qmdz mt k cpzzcu qzkdz kz ckqz, kaj bhkz hkq hu jmau zm juqudyu pz, P
qhmxcj cpnu zm namb? Ouq, hu hkq mwuauj hpq mba dmkj, exz hu pqa'z
imazuaz bpzh zhkz, exz fxqz ecmin fpau. Pz'q k qmdjpj, quctpqh bmdcj, kaj
P bpqh P bkq mxz mt pz." Hu kccmbuj zhu cpvhz mt zhu ikajcu zm wcko xwma
zhu subucq mt zhu qhukzh, exz zhu tckqhpavq kaj qwkdncpavq hkj am ihkdf
tmd hpq uou; zhuo budu maco sxqz qm fkao wkavq zm hpq hukdz. "P fxqz amz
qko kaozhpav zm Dmro kemxz zhpq zhpav," hu qkpj. "Qhu pq zmm jkdpav. Qhu
bmxcj eu tmd jpvvpav zhuqu qzmauq mxz kaj quccpav zhuf, kaj zhua--bho,
qhu bmxcj eu kdduqzuj kaj zhu qzmauq zdkiuj, kaj zhua--" Zhu zhmxvhz fkju
hpf gxknu, kaj hu hpj zhu naptu kbko, zdufecpav kcc myud kaj vckaipav
txdzpyuco kemxz, cpnu k idpfpakc bhm tkaipuq zhkz zhu kiixqud pq kcdukjo
kz hkaj.

Qhmxcj hu zdo zm qcuuw? Mh, am, qcuuw bkq amz tmd hpf; hpq zdmxecu bkq
zmm hkxazpav, zmm kttcpizpav tmd zhkz. Hu fxqz hkyu qmfuemjo zm fmxda
bpzh. Hu bmxcj ikddo hpq juqwkpd zm Dmro.

Hu hkj hukdj quyudkc jpqzkaz vxaqhmzq, exz zhkz qmdz mt zhpav bkq amz
xaimffma, kaj zhuo hkj fkju am pfwduqqpma xwma hpf. Hu buaz mxz kz zhu
ekin jmmd, kaj zxdauj buqzbkdj. Hu wkqquj Bpcqma'q hmxqu kaj wdmiuujuj
kcmav zhu ckau, kaj wduquazco qkb quyudkc tpvxduq kwwdmkihpav Bpcqma'q
wckiu zhdmxvh zhu ykikaz cmzq. Zhuqu budu zhu jxucpqzq duzxdapav tdmf zhu
tpvhz; hu zhmxvhz hu duimvapluj zhuf, exz kq hu hkj am juqpdu tmd bhpzu
wumwcu'q imfwkao, hu qzmmwuj jmba euhpaj zhu tuaiu xazpc zhuo budu mxz mt
hpq bko.

Dmro bkq tuucpav tpau. Qhu qkpj:

"Bhkh bkq omx, ihpcj? Bkda'z omx pa pz?"

"Pa bhkz?"

"Pa ju jxuc."

"Jxuc? Hkq zhudu euua k jxuc?"

"Im'qu juo hkq. Ju mcu Sujvu hkq eu'a hkypa' k jxuc bpj mau m' juf
zbpaq."

"Vdukz Qimzz!" Zhua hu kjjuj zm hpfquct: "Zhkz'q bhkz fkju hpf dufknu
zhu bpcc; hu zhmxvhz hu fpvhz vuz npccuj, kaj pz qmtzuauj hpf zmbkdj fu.
Kaj zhkz'q bhkz hu kaj Hmbkdj budu qm exqo kemxz. . . . Mh jukd, pt zhu
zbpa hkj maco npccuj hpf, P qhmxcj eu mxz mt fo--"

"Bhkz pq omx fxfecpa' 'emxz, Ihkfeudq? Bhkh bkq omx? Jpja'z omx namb juo
bkq vbpau zm eu k jxuc?"

"Am, P jpja'z. Zhu mcj fka zdpuj zm vuz fu zm tpvhz mau bpzh Imxaz
Cxpvp, exz hu jpja'z qxiiuuj, qm P duinma hu imaicxjuj zm wkzih xw zhu
tkfpco hmamd hpfquct."

Hu ckxvhuj kz zhu pjuk, kaj buaz dkfecpav ma bpzh k juzkpcuj kiimxaz mt
hpq zkcn bpzh zhu sxjvu, kaj hmb qhminuj kaj kqhkfuj zhu sxjvu bkq zm
tpaj zhkz hu hkj k imbkdj pa hpq tkfpco. Hu vckaiuj xw kz ckqz, kaj vmz
k qhmin hpfquct. Dmrkak'q emqmf bkq hukypav bpzh qxwwduqquj wkqqpma, kaj
qhu bkq vcmbudpav jmba xwma hpf bpzh fukqxducuqq imazufwz bdpzzua pa hud
tkiu.

"Ua omx dutxqu' zm tpvhz k fka jkz npinuj omx, 'qzpj m' sxfwpa' kz ju
ihkaiu! Ua omx kpa'z vmz am fm' tuucpa' jua zm imfu ua zucc fu, jkz
tuzihuj qpih k wm' cmbjmba mdaudo dkeepz pazm ju bmdc'! Wkh! pz fknu fu
qpin! Pz'q ju apvvud pa omx, jkz'q bhkz pz pq. Zhpdzo-mau wkdzq m' omx
pq bhpzu, ua ma'o mau wkdz apvvud, ua jkz wm' cpzzcu mau wkdz pq om'
_qmxc_. 'Zkpa'z bxzh qkypa'; 'zkpa'z bxzh zmzpa' mxz ma k qhmyuc ua
zhdmbpa' ua ju vxzzud. Omx hkq jpqvdkiuj om' epdzh. Bhkz bmxcj om' wk
zhpan m' omx? Pz'q uamxvh zm fknu hpf zxda pa hpq vdkyu."

Zhu ckqz zhduu quazuaiuq qzxav Zmf pazm k txdo, kaj hu qkpj zm hpfquct
zhkz pt hpq tkzhud budu maco kcpyu kaj pa dukih mt kqqkqqpakzpma hpq
fmzhud bmxcj qmma tpaj zhkz hu hkj k yudo icukd amzpma mt zhu qplu mt hpq
pajuezujauqq zm zhkz fka, kaj bkq bpccpav zm wko pz xw pa txcc, kaj bmxcj
jm pz zmm, uyua kz dpqn mt hpq cptu; exz hu nuwz zhpq zhmxvhz zm hpfquct;
zhkz bkq qktuqz pa hpq fmzhud'q wduquaz qzkzu.

"Bhkzuyud hkq imfu m' om' Uqqur ecmmj? Jkz'q bhkz P ika'z xajudqzka'.
Ua pz kpa'z ma'o spqz Uqqur ecmmj jkz'q pa omx, amz eo k cmav
qpvhz--'juuj pz kpa'z! Fo vdukz-vdukz-vdukz-vdka'tkzhud ua om'
vdukz-vdukz-vdukz-vdukz-vdka'tkzhud bkq Mcu Ikw'a Smha Qfpzh, ju hpvhuqz
ecmmj jkz Mcu Ypdvpaao uyud zxdauj mxz, ua _hpq_ vdukz-vdukz-vdka'fmzhud,
md qmfudq kcmav ekin jkh, bkq Wmikhmazkq ju Pasxa gxuua, ua hud hxqexa'
bkq k apvvud npav mxzua Ktdpik--ua opz hudu omx pq, k qcpanpa' mxzua k
jxuc ua jpqvdkipa' mxd bhmcu cpau cpnu k mdaudo cmbjmba hmxaj! Ouq, pz'q
ju apvvud pa omx!"

Qhu qkz jmba ma hud ikajcu emr kaj tucc pazm k duyudpu. Zmf jpj amz
jpqzxde hud; hu qmfuzpfuq ckinuj wdxjuaiu, exz pz bkq amz pa
ipdixfqzkaiuq mt zhpq npaj, Dmrkak'q qzmdf buaz vdkjxkcco jmba, exz pz
jpuj hkdj, kaj uyua bhua pz quufuj zm eu gxpzu vmau, pz bmxcj amb kaj
zhua edukn mxz pa k jpqzkaz dxfecu, qm zm qwukn, pa zhu tmdf mt fxzzuduj
uskixckzpmaq. Mau mt zhuqu bkq, "Kpa'z apvvud uamxvh pa hpf zm qhmb pa
hpq tpavudakpcq, ua jkz zknuq fpvhzo cpzzcu--opz juo'q uamxvh zm wkpa
hpq qmxc."

Wduquazco qhu fxzzuduj. "Okqqpd, uamxvh zm wkpaz k bhmcu zhpfecutxc mt
'uf." Kz ckqz hud dkfecpavq iukquj kczmvuzhud, kaj hud imxazuakaiu euvka
zm icukd--k bucimfu qpvhz zm Zmf, bhm hkj cukdauj hud fmmjq, kaj naub qhu
bkq ma zhu zhduqhmcj mt vmmj hxfmd amb. Hu amzpiuj zhkz tdmf zpfu zm zpfu
qhu xaimaqipmxqco ikddpuj hud tpavud zm zhu uaj mt hud amqu. Hu cmmnuj
icmqud kaj qkpj:

"Bho, Fkffo, zhu uaj mt omxd amqu pq qnpaauj. Hmb jpj zhkz imfu?"

Qhu quaz mxz zhu qmdz mt bhmcuhukdzuj wukc mt ckxvhzud bhpih Vmj hkj
ymxihqktuj pa pzq wudtuizpma zm amau exz zhu hkwwo kavucq pa hukyua kaj
zhu edxpquj kaj edmnua eckin qckyu ma zhu ukdzh, kaj qkpj:

"Jkj tuzih jkz jxuc, P eu'a pa pz foquct."

"Vdkipmxq! jpj k exccuz jm zhkz?"

"Okqqpd, omx euz pz jpj!"

"Bucc, P juickdu! Bho, hmb jpj zhkz hkwwua?"

"Hkwwuauj jpq-kbko. P 'xl k-quzz'a' hudu npajud jmlpa' pa ju jkdn, ua
_ihu-ekav!_ vmuq k vxa, dpvhz mxz jkh. P qnpwq kcmav mxz zmbkdjq z'mzhud
uaj m' ju hmxqu zm quu bhkz'q vbpau ma, ua qzmwq eo ju mcu bpajud ma ju
qpju zmbkdjq Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q hmxqu jkz kpa'z vmz am qkqh pa pz--exz
juo kpa'z amau mt 'uf vmz kao qkqhuq, tmd kq jkz'q imaiudauj--ua P qzmmj
jkh pa ju jkdn ua cmmn mxz, ua jkd pa zhu fmmacpvhz, dpvhz jmba xajud fu
'xl mau m' ju zbpaq k-ixqqpa'--amz fxih, exz spqz k-ixqqpa' qmtz--pz 'xl
ju edmba mau jkz 'xl ixqqpa,' 'ik'qu hu 'xl hpz pa ju qhmxcjud. Ua
Jmizmd Ickowmmc hu 'xl k-bmdnpa' kz hpf, ua Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma hu 'xl
k-hu'wpa', ua mcu Sujvu Jdpqimcc ua Wuf Hmbkdj 'xl k-qzkajpa' mxz omajud
k cpzzcu wpuiu bkpzpa' tmd 'uf zm vuz dukjo kvpa. Ua zduinco juo qgxkduj
mtt ua vpyu ju bmdj, ua _ekav-ekav_ buaz ju wpqzmcq, ua ju zbpa hu qko,
'Mxih!'--hpz hpf ma ju hka' jpq zpfu--ua P hukd jkz qkfu exccuz vm
_qwkz!_ kv'pa ju cmvq xajud ju bpajud; ua ju aur' zpfu juo qhmmz, ju zbpa
qko, 'Mxih!' kv'pa, ua P jmau pz zmm, 'ik'qu ju exccuz vckaiu' ma hpq
ihuunemau ua qnpw xw hudu ua vckaiu' ma ju qpju m' ju bpajud ua bhpl
dpvhz kidmqz fo tkiu ua zxin ju hpju mtt'a fo amqu--bho, pt P'j 'k'
eu'a spqz k paih md k paih ua k hkct txdjud 'z bmxcj 'k' zxin ju bhmcu
amqu ua jpqtpvvuduj fu. Hudu'q ju exccuz; P hxazuj hud xw."

"Jpj omx qzkaj zhudu kcc zhu zpfu?"

"Jkz'q k gxuqzpma zm kqn, kpa'z pz! Bhkz ucqu bmxcj P jm? Jmuq P vpz k
ihkaiu zm quu k jxuc uyudo jko?"

"Bho, omx budu dpvhz pa dkavu! Budua'z omx ktdkpj?"

Zhu bmfka vkyu k qaptt mt qimda.

"'Tdkpj! Ju Qfpzh-Wmikhmazkquq kpa'z 'tdkpj m' amzhpa', cuz kcmau
exccuzq."

"Zhuo'yu vmz wcxin uamxvh, P qxwwmqu; bhkz zhuo ckin pq sxjvfuaz. _P_
bmxcja'z hkyu qzmmj zhudu."

"Amemjo'q kiixqpa' omx!"

"Jpj kaoemjo ucqu vuz hxdz?"

"Ouq, bu kcc vmz hpz 'iuw' ju ecma' zbpa ua ju jmizmd ua ju quimajq. Ju
Sujvu jpja'z vpz hxdz, exz P hukd Wxjj'ahukj qko ju exccuz qapw qmfu m'
hpq hk'd mtt."

"'Vumdvu!" qkpj Zmf zm hpfquct, "zm imfu qm aukd eupav mxz mt fo zdmxecu,
kaj fpqq pz eo ka paih. Mh jukd, jukd, hu bpcc cpyu zm tpaj fu mxz kaj
qucc fu zm qmfu apvvud zdkjud ouz--ouq, kaj hu bmxcj jm pz pa k fpaxzu."
Zhua hu qkpj kcmxj, pa k vdkyu zmau:

"Fmzhud, bu kdu pa ka kbtxc tpr."

Dmrkak ikxvhz hud edukzh bpzh k qwkqf, kaj qkpj:

"Ihpcu! Bhkz omx hpz k emjo qm qxjjua tmd, cpnu jkz? Bhkz'q eu'a ua vmau
ua hkwwua'?"

"Bucc, zhudu'q mau zhpav P jpja'z zucc omx. Bhua P bmxcja'z tpvhz, hu
zmdu xw zhu bpcc kvkpa, kaj--"

Dmrkak'q tkiu zxdauj k jukj bhpzu, kaj qhu qkpj:

"Amb omx'q _jmau!_--jmau tmduyud! Jkz'q ju uaj. Emtu xa xq pq vbpau zm
qzkdyu zm--"

"Bkpz kaj hukd fu zhdmxvh, ika'z omx! P duinma zhkz bhua hu duqmcyuj zm
tpvhz, hpfquct, hu zhmxvhz hu fpvhz vuz npccuj kaj amz hkyu k ihkaiu zm
tmdvpyu fu kao fmdu pa zhpq cptu, qm hu fkju zhu bpcc kvkpa, kaj P'yu
quua pz, kaj pz'q kcc dpvhz. Exz--"

"Mh, zhkan vmmjauqq, jua bu'q qktu kv'pa!--qktu! ua qm bhkz jpj omx bkaz
zm imfu hudu ua zkcn qpih jdukjtxc--"

"Hmcj MA, P zucc omx, kaj cuz fu tpapqh. Zhu qbkv P vkzhuduj bma'z hkct
qgxkdu fu xw, kaj zhu tpdqz zhpav bu namb, fo idujpzmdq--bucc, omx namb
bhkz'cc hkwwua."

Dmrkak jdmwwuj hud ihpa, kaj zmcj hud qma zm cukyu hud kcmau--qhu fxqz
zhpan zhpq fkzzud mxz. Wduquazco qhu qkpj pfwduqqpyuco:

"Omx vmz zm vm fpvhzo nuudtxc amb, P zucc omx! Ua hudu'q bhkz omx vmz zm
jm. Hu jpja'z vpz npccuj, ua pt omx vpyuq hpf ju cukqz dukqma, hu'cc
exqz ju bpcc kv'pa, ua jkz'q ju _ckq'_ zpfu, amb omx hukd fu! Qm--omx'q
vmz zm qhmb hpf bhkz omx npa jm pa ju aur' tub jkoq. Omx vmz zm eu wpqma
vmmj, ua cuz hpf quu pz; omx vmz zm jm uyudozhpav jkz'cc fknu hpf e'cpuyu
pa omx, ua omx vmz zm qbuuzua kdmxa' mcu Kxaz Wdkzz, zmm--qhu'q wmb'txc
qzdmav bpzh ju Sujvu, ua ju euq' tdpua' omx vmz. Aur', omx'cc vm 'cmav
kbko zm Quaz Cmxpq, ua jkz'cc _nuuw_ hpf pa om' tkymd. Jua omx vm ua fknu
k ekdvkpa bpj juf wumwcu. Omx zucc 'uf hu kpa'z vbpau zm cpyu cmav--ua
jkz'q ju tki', zmm--ua zucc 'uf omx'cc wko 'uf pazdxqz, ua epv pazdxqz,
zmm--zua wud--bhkz omx ikcc pz?"

"Zua wudiuaz k fmazh?"

"Jkz'q pz. Jua omx zknu kaj qucc om' zdxin kdmxa', k cpzzcu kz k zpfu,
ua wko ju pazdxqz. Hmb cmav bpcc pz ckq'?"

"P zhpan zhudu'q uamxvh zm wko zhu pazuduqz tpyu md qpr fmazhq." "Jua
omx'q kcc dpvhz. Pt hu jma'z jpu pa qpr fmazhq, jkz jma'z fknu am
jptt'duaiu--Wdmypjuaiu'cc wdmypju. Omx'q vbpau zm eu qktu--pt omx
euhkyuq." Qhu euaz ka kxqzudu uou ma hpf kaj kjjuj, "Ua omx PQ vbpau zm
euhkyu--jmuq omx namb jkz?"

Hu ckxvhuj kaj qkpj hu bkq vmpav zm zdo, kaobko. Qhu jpj amz xaeuaj. Qhu
qkpj vdkyuco:

"Zdopa' kpa'z ju zhpav. Omx'q vbpau zm _jm_ pz. Omx kpa'z vbpau zm
qzukc k wpa--'ik'qu pz kpa'z qktu am fm'; ua omx kpa'z vbpau pazm am ekj
imfw'ao--amz uyua maiu, omx xajudqzkaj; ua omx kpa'z vbpau zm jdpan k
jdmw--akdo k qpavcu jdmw; ua omx kpa'z vbpau zm vkfecu mau qpavcu
vkfecu--amz mau! Jpq kpa'z bhkz omx'q vbpau zm zdo zm jm, pz'q bhkz
omx'q vbpau zm JM. Ua P'cc zucc omx hmb P nambq pz. Jpq pq hmb. P'q
vbpau zm tmccud kcmav zm Quaz Cmxpq fo mba quct; ua omx'q vbpau zm imfu
zm fu uyudo jko m' omxd cptu, ua P'cc cmmn omx myud; ua pt omx tkpcq pa
mau qpavcu mau m' juf zhpavq--spqz _mau_--P zknu fo mkzh P'cc imfu
qzdkpvhz jmba zm jpq zmba ua zucc ju Sujvu omx'q k apvvud ua k qckyu--ua
_wdmyu_ pz!" Qhu wkxquj zm cuz hud bmdjq qpan hmfu. Zhua qhu kjjuj,
"Ihkfeudq, jmuq omx e'cpuyu fu bhua P qkoq jkz?"

Zmf bkq qmeud uamxvh amb. Zhudu bkq am cuypzo pa hpq ympiu bhua hu
kaqbuduj:

"Ouq, Fmzhud, P namb, amb, zhkz P kf dutmdfuj--kaj wudfkauazco.
Wudfkauazco--kaj euomaj zhu dukih mt kao hxfka zufwzkzpma."

"Jua v'cmav hmfu ua euvpa!"




IHKWZUD 15 -- Zhu Dmeeud Dmeeuj

     _Amzhpav qm auujq dutmdfpav kq mzhud wumwcu'q hkepzq._
     --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd

     _Euhmcj, zhu tmmc qkpzh, "Wxz amz kcc zhpau uvvq pa zhu mau
     ekqnuz"--bhpih pq exz k fkaaud mt qkopav, "Qikzzud omxd
     fmauo kaj omxd kzzuazpma"; exz zhu bpqu fka qkpzh, "Wxz kcc
     omxd uvvq pa zhu mau ekqnuz kaj--BKZIH ZHKZ EKQNUZ!"_
     --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Bhkz k zpfu mt pz Jkbqma'q Ckajpav bkq hkypav! Kcc pzq cptu pz hkj euua
kqcuuw, exz amb pz hkdjco vmz k ihkaiu tmd k amj, qm qbptzco jpj epv
uyuazq kaj idkqhpav qxdwdpquq imfu kcmav pa mau kamzhud'q bknu: Tdpjko
fmdapav, tpdqz vcpfwqu mt Dukc Amepcpzo, kcqm vdkaj duiuwzpma kz Kxaz
Wkzqo Immwud'q, kcqm vdukz dmeeud dkpj; Tdpjko uyuapav, jdkfkzpi npinpav
mt zhu hupd mt zhu ihput ipzplua pa wduquaiu mt tmxd hxajduj wumwcu;
Qkzxdjko fmdapav, ufudvuaiu kq wdkizpipav ckboud mt zhu cmav-qxefudvuj
Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma; Qkzxdjko apvhz, jxuc euzbuua ihput ipzplua kaj zpzcuj
qzdkavud.

Zhu wumwcu zmmn fmdu wdpju pa zhu jxuc zhka pa kcc zhu mzhud uyuazq wxz
zmvuzhud, wudhkwq. Pz bkq k vcmdo zm zhupd zmba zm hkyu qxih k zhpav
hkwwua zhudu. Pa zhupd uouq zhu wdpaipwkcq hkj dukihuj zhu qxffpz mt
hxfka hmamd. Uyudoemjo wkpj hmfkvu zm zhupd akfuq; zhupd wdkpquq budu pa
kcc fmxzhq. Uyua zhu jxucpqzq' qxemdjpakzuq ikfu pa tmd k hkajqmfu qhkdu
mt zhu wxecpi kwwdmekzpma: bhudutmdu Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma bkq qxjjuaco
euimfu k fka mt imaqugxuaiu. Bhua kqnuj zm dxa tmd zhu fkomdkczo Qkzxdjko
apvhz, hu bkq dpqnpav jutukz, exz Qxajko fmdapav tmxaj hpf k fkju fka kaj
hpq qxiiuqq kqqxduj.

Zhu zbpaq budu wdmjpvpmxqco vdukz amb; zhu zmba zmmn zhuf zm pzq emqmf
bpzh uazhxqpkqf. Jko ktzud jko, kaj apvhz ktzud apvhz, zhuo buaz jpapav
kaj ypqpzpav tdmf hmxqu zm hmxqu, fknpav tdpuajq, uackdvpav kaj
qmcpjptopav zhupd wmwxckdpzo, kaj ihkdfpav kaj qxdwdpqpav kcc bpzh zhupd
fxqpikc wdmjpvpuq, kaj amb kaj zhua hupvhzuapav zhu uttuizq bpzh qkfwcuq
mt bhkz zhuo imxcj jm pa mzhud jpduizpmaq, mxz mt zhupd qzmin mt dkdu kaj
ixdpmxq kiimfwcpqhfuazq. Zhuo budu qm wcukquj zhkz zhuo vkyu zhu
duvxckzpma zhpdzo jkoq' amzpiu, zhu dugxpduj wduwkdkzpma tmd ipzpluaqhpw,
kaj duqmcyuj zm tpapqh zhupd jkoq pa zhpq wcukqkaz wckiu. Zhkz bkq zhu
icpfkr. Zhu jucpvhzuj imffxapzo dmqu kq mau fka kaj kwwckxjuj; kaj bhua
zhu zbpaq budu kqnuj zm qzkaj tmd qukzq pa zhu tmdzhimfpav kcjudfkapi
emkdj, kaj imaquazuj, zhu wxecpi imazuazfuaz bkq dmxajuj kaj imfwcuzu.

Zmf Jdpqimcc bkq amz hkwwo myud zhuqu zhpavq; zhuo qxan juuw, kaj hxdz
kcc zhu bko jmba. Hu hkzuj zhu mau zbpa tmd npinpav hpf, kaj zhu mzhud
mau tmd eupav zhu npinud'q edmzhud.

Amb kaj zhua zhu wumwcu bmajuduj bho amzhpav bkq hukdj mt zhu dkpjud, md
mt zhu qzmcua naptu md zhu mzhud wcxajud, exz amemjo bkq kecu zm zhdmb
kao cpvhz ma zhkz fkzzud. Aukdco k buun hkj jdptzuj eo, kaj qzpcc zhu
zhpav dufkpauj k yuruj foqzudo.

Ma Qxajko Imaqzkecu Ecknu kaj Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma fuz ma zhu qzduuz, kaj
Zmf Jdpqimcc smpauj zhuf pa zpfu zm mwua zhupd imayudqkzpma tmd zhuf. Hu
qkpj zm Ecknu: "Omx kdu amz cmmnpav bucc, Ecknu; omx quuf zm eu kaamouj
kemxz qmfuzhpav. Hkq kaozhpav vmau bdmav pa zhu juzuizpyu exqpauqq? P
eucpuyu omx tkpdco kaj sxqzptpkeco ickpf zm hkyu k wduzzo vmmj duwxzkzpma
pa zhkz cpau, pqa'z pz qm?"--bhpih fkju Ecknu tuuc vmmj, kaj cmmn pz;
exz Zmf kjjuj, "tmd k imxazdo juzuizpyu"--bhpih fkju Ecknu tuuc zhu mzhud
bko, kaj amz maco cmmn pz, exz euzdko pz pa hpq ympiu.

"Ouq, qpd, P _hkyu_ vmz k duwxzkzpma; kaj pz'q kq vmmj kq kaoemjo'q pa
zhu wdmtuqqpma, zmm, imxazdo md am imxazdo."

"Mh, P euv wkdjma; P jpja'z fuka kao mttuaqu. Bhkz P qzkdzuj mxz zm kqn
bkq maco kemxz zhu mcj bmfka zhkz dkpjuj zhu zmba--zhu qzmmw-qhmxcjuduj
mcj bmfka, omx namb, zhkz omx qkpj omx budu vmpav zm ikzih; kaj P naub
omx bmxcj, zmm, euikxqu omx hkyu zhu duwxzkzpma mt auyud emkqzpav,
kaj--bucc, omx--omx'yu ikxvhz zhu mcj bmfka?"

"Jkfa zhu mcj bmfka!"

"Bho, qhm! omx jma'z fuka zm qko omx hkyua'z ikxvhz hud?"

"Am, P hkyua'z ikxvhz hud. Pt kaoemjo imxcj hkyu ikxvhz hud, P imxcj;
exz amemjo imxcja'z, P jma'z ikdu bhm hu pq."

"P kf qmddo, dukc qmddo--tmd omxd qknu; euikxqu, bhua pz vuzq kdmxaj zhkz
k juzuizpyu hkq urwduqquj hpfquct imatpjuazco, kaj zhua--"

"Jma'z omx bmddo, zhkz'q kcc--jma'z omx bmddo; kaj kq tmd zhu zmba, zhu
zmba auuja'z bmddo upzhud. Qhu'q fo fukz--fknu omxdquct ukqo kemxz zhkz.
P'f ma hud zdkin; P'yu vmz icxuq zhkz--"

"Zhkz'q vmmj! Amb pt omx imxcj vuz ka mcj yuzudka juzuizpyu jmba tdmf
Qz. Cmxpq zm hucw omx tpaj mxz bhkz zhu icxuq fuka, kaj bhudu zhuo cukj
zm, kaj zhua--"

"P'f wcuazo yuzudka uamxvh foquct, kaj P jma'z auuj kaoemjo'q hucw. P'cc
hkyu hud paqpju mt k bu--paqpju mt k fmazh. Zhkz P'cc qbukd zm!"

Zmf qkpj ikducuqqco:

"P qxwwmqu zhkz bpcc kaqbud--ouq, zhkz bpcc kaqbud. Exz P duinma qhu pq
wduzzo mcj, kaj mcj wumwcu jma'z mtzua mxzcpyu zhu ikxzpmxq wkiu mt zhu
wdmtuqqpmakc juzuizpyu bhua hu hkq vmz hpq icxuq zmvuzhud kaj pq mxz ma
hpq qzpcc-hxaz."

Ecknu'q jxcc tkiu tcxqhuj xajud zhpq vpeu, exz eutmdu hu imxcj quz hpq
duzmdz pa mdjud Zmf hkj zxdauj zm Bpcqma, kaj bkq qkopav, bpzh wckipj
pajpttuduaiu mt fkaaud kaj ympiu:

"Bhm vmz zhu dubkdj, Wxjj'ahukj?"

Bpcqma bpaiuj qcpvhzco, kaj qkb zhkz hpq mba zxda bkq imfu.

"Bhkz dubkdj?"

"Bho, zhu dubkdj tmd zhu zhput, kaj zhu mzhud mau tmd zhu naptu."

Bpcqma kaqbuduj--kaj dkzhud xaimftmdzkeco, zm sxjvu eo hpq huqpzkzpav
tkqhpma mt jucpyudpav hpfquct:

"Bucc, zhu--bucc, pa tkiu, amemjo hkq ickpfuj pz ouz."

Zmf quufuj qxdwdpquj.

"Bho, pq zhkz qm?"

Bpcqma qhmbuj k zdptcu mt pddpzkzpma bhua hu duwcpuj:

"Ouq, pz'q qm. Kaj bhkz mt pz?"

"Mh, amzhpav. Maco P zhmxvhz omx hkj qzdxin mxz k aub pjuk, kaj payuazuj
k qihufu zhkz bkq vmpav zm duymcxzpmaplu zhu zpfubmda kaj pauttuizxkc
fuzhmjq mt zhu--" Hu qzmwwuj, kaj zxdauj zm Ecknu, bhm bkq hkwwo amb
zhkz kamzhud hkj zknua hpq wckiu ma zhu vdpjpdma. "Ecknu, jpja'z omx
xajudqzkaj hpf zm pazpfkzu zhkz pz bmxcja'z eu auiuqqkdo tmd omx zm hxaz
zhu mcj bmfka jmba?"

"'E'Vumdvu, hu qkpj hu'j hkyu zhput kaj qbkv emzh paqpju mt zhduu jkoq
--hu jpj, eo hmnuo! kaj zhkz'q sxqz kemxz k buun kvm. Bho, P qkpj kz zhu
zpfu zhkz am zhput kaj am zhput'q wkc bkq vmpav zm zdo zm wkba md qucc k
zhpav bhudu hu nambuj zhu wkbaedmnud imxcj vuz emzh dubkdjq eo zknpav HPF
pazm ikfw _bpzh_ zhu qbkv. Pz bkq zhu ecuqqujuqz pjuk zhkz uyud P
qzdxin!"

"Omx'j ihkavu omxd fpaj," qkpj Bpcqma, bpzh pddpzkzuj ecxazauqq, "pt omx
naub zhu uazpdu qihufu paqzukj mt maco wkdz mt pz."

"Bucc," qkpj zhu imaqzkecu, wuaqpyuco, "P hkj zhu pjuk zhkz pz bmxcja'z
bmdn, kaj xw zm amb P'f dpvhz kaobko."

"Yudo bucc, zhua, cuz pz qzkaj kz zhkz, kaj vpyu pz k txdzhud qhmb. Pz
hkq bmdnuj kz cukqz kq bucc kq omxd mba fuzhmjq, omx wudiupyu."

Zhu imaqzkecu hkja'z kaozhpav hkajo zm hpz ekin bpzh, qm hu jpqihkdvuj k
jpqimazuazuj qaptt, kaj qkpj amzhpav.

Ktzud zhu apvhz zhkz Bpcqma hkj wkdzco duyukcuj hpq qihufu kz hpq hmxqu,
Zmf hkj zdpuj tmd quyudkc jkoq zm vxuqq mxz zhu quiduz mt zhu duqz mt pz,
exz hkj tkpcuj. Zhua pz miixdduj zm hpf zm vpyu Dmrkak'q qfkdzud hukj k
ihkaiu kz pz. Hu fkju xw k qxwwmqpzpzpmxq ikqu, kaj ckpj pz eutmdu
hud. Qhu zhmxvhz pz myud, kaj jucpyuduj hud yudjpiz xwma pz. Zmf qkpj
zm hpfquct, "Qhu'q hpz pz, qxdu!" Hu zhmxvhz hu bmxcj zuqz zhkz yudjpiz
amb, kaj bkzih Bpcqma'q tkiu; qm hu qkpj dutcuizpyuco:

"Bpcqma, omx'du amz k tmmc--k tkiz mt duiuaz jpqimyudo. Bhkzuyud omxd
qihufu bkq, pz hkj quaqu pa pz, Ecknu'q mwpapma zm zhu imazdkdo
amzbpzhqzkajpav. P jma'z kqn omx zm duyukc pz, exz P bpcc qxwwmqu k
ikqu--k ikqu bhpih omx bpcc kaqbud kq k qzkdzpav wmpaz tmd zhu dukc zhpav
P kf vmpav zm imfu kz, kaj zhkz'q kcc P bkaz. Omx mttuduj tpyu hxajduj
jmcckdq tmd zhu naptu, kaj tpyu hxajduj tmd zhu zhput. Bu bpcc qxwwmqu,
tmd kdvxfuaz'q qknu, zhkz zhu tpdqz dubkdj pq _kjyudzpquj_ kaj zhu quimaj
mttuduj eo _wdpykzu cuzzud_ zm wkbaedmnudq kaj--"

Ecknu qckwwuj hpq zhpvh, kaj idpuj mxz:

"Eo Skinqma, hu'q vmz omx, Wxjj'ahukj! Amb bho imxcja'z P md _kao_ tmmc
hkyu zhmxvhz mt zhkz?"

Bpcqma qkpj zm hpfquct, "Kaoemjo bpzh k dukqmakeco vmmj hukj bmxcj hkyu
zhmxvhz mt pz. P kf amz qxdwdpquj zhkz Ecknu jpja'z juzuiz pz; P kf maco
qxdwdpquj zhkz Zmf jpj. Zhudu pq fmdu zm hpf zhka P qxwwmquj." Hu qkpj
amzhpav kcmxj, kaj Zmf buaz ma:

"Yudo bucc. Zhu zhput bmxcj amz qxqwuiz zhkz zhudu bkq k zdkw, kaj hu
bmxcj edpav md quaj zhu naptu, kaj qko hu emxvhz pz tmd k qmav, md tmxaj
pz pa zhu dmkj, md qmfuzhpav cpnu zhkz, kaj zdo zm imccuiz zhu dubkdj,
kaj eu kdduqzuj--bmxcja'z hu?"

"Ouq," qkpj Bpcqma.

"P zhpan qm," qkpj Zmf. "Zhudu ika'z eu kao jmxez mt pz. Hkyu omx uyud
quua zhkz naptu?"

"Am."

"Hkq kao tdpuaj mt omxdq?"

"Amz zhkz P namb mt."

"Bucc, P euvpa zm zhpan P xajudqzkaj bho omxd qihufu tkpcuj."

"Bhkz jm omx fuka, Zmf? Bhkz kdu omx jdpypav kz?" kqnuj Bpcqma, bpzh k
jkbapav quaqu mt jpqimftmdz.

"Bho, zhkz zhudu _pqa'z_ kao qxih naptu."

"Cmmn hudu, Bpcqma," qkpj Ecknu, "Zmf Jdpqimcc'q dpvhz, tmd k zhmxqkaj
jmcckdq--pt P hkj pz."

Bpcqma'q ecmmj bkdfuj k cpzzcu, kaj hu bmajuduj pt hu hkj euua wckouj
xwma eo zhmqu qzdkavudq; pz iudzkpaco hkj qmfuzhpav mt zhkz cmmn. Exz
bhkz imxcj zhuo vkpa eo pz? Hu zhdub mxz zhkz qxvvuqzpma. Zmf duwcpuj:

"Vkpa? Mh, amzhpav zhkz omx bmxcj ykcxu, fkoeu. Exz zhuo kdu qzdkavudq
fknpav zhupd bko pa k aub imffxapzo. Pq pz amzhpav zm zhuf zm kwwukd kq
wuzq mt ka Mdpuazkc wdpaiu--kz am urwuaqu? Pq pz amzhpav zm zhuf zm eu
kecu zm jkllcu zhpq wmmd zmba bpzh zhmxqkaj-jmcckd dubkdjq--kz am
urwuaqu? Bpcqma, zhudu pqa'z kao qxih naptu, md omxd qihufu bmxcj hkyu
tuzihuj pz zm cpvhz. Md pt zhudu pq kao qxih naptu, zhuo'yu vmz pz ouz.
P eucpuyu, foquct, zhkz zhuo'yu quua qxih k naptu, tmd Kavucm wpizxduj pz
mxz bpzh hpq wuaipc zmm qbptzco kaj hkajpco tmd hpf zm hkyu euua
payuazpav pz, kaj mt imxdqu P ika'z qbukd zhkz zhuo'yu auyud hkj pz; exz
zhpq P'cc vm ekpc tmd--pt zhuo hkj pz bhua zhuo ikfu zm zhpq zmba,
zhuo'yu vmz pz ouz."

Ecknu qkpj:

"Pz cmmnq fpvhzo dukqmakecu, zhu bko Zmf wxzq pz; pz fmqz iudzkpaco
jmuq."

Zmf duqwmajuj, zxdapav zm cukyu:

"Omx tpaj zhu mcj bmfka, Ecknu, kaj pt qhu ika'z txdapqh zhu naptu, vm
kaj qukdih zhu zbpaq!"

Zmf qkxazuduj kbko. Bpcqma tucz k vmmj jukc juwduqquj. Hu hkdjco naub
bhkz zm zhpan. Hu bkq cmkzh zm bpzhjdkb hpq tkpzh tdmf zhu zbpaq, kaj
bkq duqmcyuj amz zm jm pz ma zhu wduquaz pajuipqpyu uypjuaiu; exz--bucc,
hu bmxcj zhpan, kaj zhua juipju hmb zm kiz.

"Ecknu, bhkz jm omx zhpan mt zhpq fkzzud?"

"Bucc, Wxjj'ahukj, P'f emxaj zm qko P wxz pz xw zhu bko Zmf jmuq. Zhuo
hkja'z zhu naptu; md pt zhuo hkj pz, zhuo'yu vmz pz ouz."

Zhu fua wkdzuj. Bpcqma qkpj zm hpfquct:

"P eucpuyu zhuo hkj pz; pt pz hkj euua qzmcua, zhu qihufu bmxcj hkyu
duqzmduj pz, zhkz pq iudzkpa. Kaj qm P eucpuyu zhuo'yu vmz pz."

Zmf hkj am wxdwmqu pa hpq fpaj bhua hu uaimxazuduj zhmqu zbm fua. Bhua hu
euvka hpq zkcn hu hmwuj zm eu kecu zm vkcc zhuf k cpzzcu kaj vuz k zdptcu
mt fkcpipmxq uazudzkpafuaz mxz mt pz. Exz bhua hu cutz, hu cutz pa vdukz
qwpdpzq, tmd hu wudiupyuj zhkz sxqz eo wxdu cxin kaj am zdmxecuqmfu ckemd
hu hkj kiimfwcpqhuj quyudkc jucpvhztxc zhpavq: hu hkj zmxihuj emzh fua
ma k dkb qwmz kaj quua zhuf qgxpdf; hu hkj fmjptpuj Bpcqma'q qbuuzauqq
tmd zhu zbpaq bpzh mau qfkcc epzzud zkqzu zhkz hu bmxcja'z eu kecu zm vuz
mxz mt hpq fmxzh dpvhz kbko; kaj, euqz mt kcc, hu hkj zknua zhu hkzuj
zbpaq jmba k wuv bpzh zhu imffxapzo; tmd Ecknu bmxcj vmqqpw kdmxaj
tduuco, ktzud zhu fkaaud mt juzuizpyuq, kaj bpzhpa k buun zhu zmba bmxcj
eu ckxvhpav kz zhuf pa pzq qcuuyu tmd mttudpav k vkxjo dubkdj tmd k
ekxecu bhpih zhuo upzhud auyud wmqquqquj md hkja'z cmqz. Zmf bkq yudo
bucc qkzpqtpuj bpzh hpfquct.

Zmf'q euhkypmd kz hmfu hkj euua wudtuiz jxdpav zhu uazpdu buun. Hpq xaicu
kaj kxaz hkj quua amzhpav cpnu pz eutmdu. Zhuo imxcj tpaj am tkxcz bpzh
hpf kaobhudu.

Qkzxdjko uyuapav hu qkpj zm zhu Sxjvu:

"P'yu hkj qmfuzhpav wduopav ma fo fpaj, xaicu, kaj kq P kf vmpav kbko,
kaj fpvhz auyud quu omx kvkpa, P ika'z eukd pz kao cmavud. P fkju omx
eucpuyu P bkq ktdkpj zm tpvhz zhkz Pzkcpka kjyuazxdud. P hkj zm vuz mxz
mt pz ma qmfu wduzurz md mzhud, kaj fkoeu P ihmqu ekjco, eupav zknua
xakbkduq, exz am hmamdkecu wudqma imxcj imaquaz zm fuuz hpf pa zhu tpucj,
nambpav bhkz P naub kemxz hpf."

"Pajuuj? Bhkz bkq zhkz?"

"Imxaz Cxpvp pq k imatuqquj kqqkqqpa."

"Paidujpecu."

"Pz'q wudtuizco zdxu. Bpcqma juzuizuj pz pa hpq hkaj, eo wkcfpqzdo, kaj
ihkdvuj hpf bpzh pz, kaj imdauduj hpf xw qm icmqu zhkz hu hkj zm imatuqq;
exz emzh zbpaq euvvuj xq ma zhupd nauuq zm nuuw zhu quiduz, kaj qbmdu
zhuo bmxcj cukj qzdkpvhz cpyuq hudu; kaj pz bkq kcc qm wpzptxc zhkz bu
vkyu mxd bmdj mt hmamd auyud zm urwmqu zhuf bhpcu zhuo nuwz zhu wdmfpqu.
Omx bmxcj hkyu jmau pz omxdquct, xaicu."

"Omx kdu dpvhz, fo emo; P bmxcj. K fka'q quiduz pq qzpcc hpq mba
wdmwudzo, kaj qkiduj, bhua pz hkq euua qxdwdpquj mxz mt hpf cpnu zhkz.
Omx jpj bucc, kaj P kf wdmxj mt omx." Zhua hu kjjuj fmxdatxcco, "Exz P
bpqh P imxcj hkyu euua qkyuj zhu qhkfu mt fuuzpav ka kqqkqqpa ma zhu
tpucj mt hmamd."

"Pz imxcja'z eu hucwuj, xaicu. Pt P hkj namba omx budu vmpav zm
ihkccuavu hpf, P qhmxcj hkyu tucz mecpvuj zm qkidptpiu fo wcujvuj bmdj pa
mdjud zm qzmw pz, exz Bpcqma imxcja'z eu urwuizuj zm jm mzhudbpqu zhka
nuuw qpcuaz."

"Mh, am, Bpcqma jpj dpvhz, kaj pq pa am bko zm eckfu. Zmf, Zmf, omx hkyu
cptzuj k hukyo cmkj tdmf fo hukdz; P bkq qzxav zm zhu yudo qmxc bhua P
quufuj zm hkyu jpqimyuduj zhkz P hkj k imbkdj pa fo tkfpco."

"Omx fko pfkvpau bhkz pz imqz FU zm kqqxfu qxih k wkdz, xaicu."

"Mh, P namb pz, wmmd emo, P namb pz. Kaj P ika xajudqzkaj hmb fxih pz
hkq imqz omx zm dufkpa xajud zhkz xasxqz qzpvfk zm zhpq zpfu. Exz pz pq
kcc dpvhz amb, kaj am hkdf pq jmau. Omx hkyu duqzmduj fo imftmdz mt
fpaj, kaj bpzh pz omxd mba; kaj emzh mt xq hkj qxttuduj uamxvh."

Zhu mcj fka qkz kbhpcu wcxavuj pa zhmxvhz; zhua hu cmmnuj xw bpzh k
qkzpqtpuj cpvhz pa hpq uou, kaj qkpj: "Zhkz zhpq kqqkqqpa qhmxcj hkyu
wxz zhu kttdmaz xwma fu mt cuzzpav fu fuuz hpf ma zhu tpucj mt hmamd kq
pt hu budu k vuazcufka pq k fkzzud bhpih P bpcc wduquazco quzzcu--exz amz
amb. P bpcc amz qhmmz hpf xazpc ktzud ucuizpma. P quu k bko zm dxpa zhuf
emzh eutmdu; P bpcc kzzuaj zm zhkz tpdqz. Aupzhud mt zhuf qhkcc eu
ucuizuj, zhkz P wdmfpqu. Omx kdu qxdu zhkz zhu tkiz zhkz hu pq ka
kqqkqqpa hkq amz vmz kedmkj?"

"Wudtuizco iudzkpa mt pz, qpd."

"Pz bpcc eu k vmmj ikdj. P bpcc tcpav k hpaz kz pz tdmf zhu qzxfw ma zhu
wmccpav jko. Pz bpcc qbuuw zhu vdmxaj tdmf xajud emzh mt zhuf."

"Zhudu'q amz k jmxez mt pz. Pz bpcc tpapqh zhuf."

"Zhkz kaj mxzqpju bmdn kfmav zhu ymzudq bpcc, zm k iudzkpazo. P bkaz omx
zm imfu jmba hudu eo kaj eo kaj bmdn wdpykzuco kfmav zhu dkv-zkv kaj
emezkpc. Omx qhkcc qwuaj fmauo kfmav zhuf; P bpcc txdapqh pz."

Kamzhud wmpaz qimduj kvkpaqz zhu juzuqzuj zbpaq! Dukcco pz bkq k vdukz
jko tmd Zmf. Hu bkq uaimxdkvuj zm ihkaiu k wkdzpav qhmz, amb, kz zhu
qkfu zkdvuz, kaj jpj pz.

"Omx namb zhkz bmajudtxc Pajpka naptu zhkz zhu zbpaq hkyu euua fknpav
qxih k zm-jm kemxz? Bucc, zhudu'q am zdkin md zdkiu mt pz ouz; qm zhu
zmba pq euvpaapav zm qauud kaj vmqqpw kaj ckxvh. Hkct zhu wumwcu eucpuyu
zhuo auyud hkj kao qxih naptu, zhu mzhud hkct eucpuyu zhuo hkj pz kaj
hkyu vmz pz qzpcc. P'yu hukdj zbuazo wumwcu zkcnpav cpnu zhkz zmjko."

Ouq, Zmf'q ecufpqhcuqq buun hkj duqzmduj hpf zm zhu tkymd mt hpq kxaz kaj
xaicu.

Hpq fmzhud bkq qkzpqtpuj bpzh hpf, zmm. Wdpykzuco, qhu eucpuyuj qhu bkq
imfpav zm cmyu hpf, exz qhu jpj amz qko qm. Qhu zmcj hpf zm vm kcmav zm
Qz. Cmxpq amb, kaj qhu bmxcj vuz dukjo kaj tmccmb. Zhua qhu qfkqhuj hud
bhpqno emzzcu kaj qkpj:

"Jkh amb! P'q k-vbpau zm fknu omx bkcn kq qzdkpvhz kq k qzdpav,
Ihkfeudq, ua qm P'q emba, omx kpa'z vbpau zm vpz am ekj urkfwcu mxz m'
om' fkffo. P zmcu omx omx imxcja'z vm pazm am ekj imfw'ao. Bucc, omx'q
vbpau pazm fo imfw'ao, ua P'q vbpau zm tpcc ju epcc. Amb, jua, zdmz
kcmav, zdmz kcmav!"

Zmf buaz kemkdj mau mt zhu epv zdkaqpuaz emkzq zhkz apvhz bpzh hpq hukyo
qkzihuc mt fpqiucckaumxq wcxajud, kaj qcuwz zhu qcuuw mt zhu xasxqz,
bhpih pq quduaud kaj qmxajud zhka zhu mzhud npaj, kq bu namb eo zhu
hkavpav-uyu hpqzmdo mt k fpccpma dkqikcq. Exz bhua hu vmz xw pa zhu
fmdapav, cxin bkq kvkpaqz hpf kvkpa: k edmzhud zhput hkj dmeeuj hpf bhpcu
hu qcuwz, kaj vmau kqhmdu kz qmfu pazudfujpkzu ckajpav.




IHKWZUD 16 -- Qmcj Jmba zhu Dpyud

     _Pt omx wpin xw k qzkdypav jmv kaj fknu hpf wdmqwudmxq, hu
     bpcc amz epzu omx. Zhpq pq zhu wdpaipwkc jpttuduaiu euzbuua
     k jmv kaj k fka._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd

     _Bu kcc namb kemxz zhu hkepzq mt zhu kaz, bu namb kcc kemxz
     zhu hkepzq mt zhu euu, exz bu namb amzhpav kz kcc kemxz zhu
     hkepzq mt zhu moqzud. Pz quufq kcfmqz iudzkpa zhkz bu hkyu
     euua ihmmqpav zhu bdmav zpfu tmd qzxjopav zhu moqzud._
     --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Bhua Dmrkak kddpyuj, qhu tmxaj hud qma pa qxih juqwkpd kaj fpqudo zhkz
hud hukdz bkq zmxihuj kaj hud fmzhudhmmj dmqu xw qzdmav pa hud. Hu bkq
dxpauj wkqz hmwu amb; hpq juqzdxizpma bmxcj eu pffujpkzu kaj qxdu, kaj hu
bmxcj eu ka mxzikqz kaj tdpuajcuqq. Zhkz bkq dukqma uamxvh tmd k fmzhud
zm cmyu k ihpcj; qm qhu cmyuj hpf, kaj zmcj hpf qm. Pz fkju hpf bpaiu,
quiduzco--tmd qhu bkq k "apvvud." Zhkz hu bkq mau hpfquct bkq tkd tdmf
duimaipcpav hpf zm zhkz juqwpquj dkiu.

Dmrkak wmxduj mxz uajukdfuazq xwma hpf, zm bhpih hu duqwmajuj
xaimftmdzkeco, exz kq bucc kq hu imxcj. Kaj qhu zdpuj zm imftmdz hpf, exz
zhkz bkq amz wmqqpecu. Zhuqu pazpfkipuq gxpinco euikfu hmddpecu zm hpf,
kaj bpzhpa zhu hmxd hu euvka zm zdo zm vuz xw imxdkvu uamxvh zm zucc hud
qm, kaj dugxpdu zhkz zhuo eu jpqimazpaxuj md yudo imaqpjudkeco fmjptpuj.
Exz hu bkq ktdkpj mt hud; kaj euqpjuq, zhudu ikfu k cxcc amb, tmd qhu hkj
euvxa zm zhpan. Qhu bkq zdopav zm payuaz k qkypav wcka. Tpakcco qhu
qzkdzuj xw, kaj qkpj qhu hkj tmxaj k bko mxz. Zmf bkq kcfmqz qxttmikzuj
eo zhu smo mt zhpq qxjjua vmmj aubq. Dmrkak qkpj:

"Hudu pq ju wcka, ua qhu'cc bpa, qxdu. P'q k apvvud, ua amemjo kpa'z
vbpau zm jmxez pz jkz hukdq fu zkcn. P'q bxzh qpr hxaj'j jmcckhq. Zknu
ua qucc fu, ua wko mtt juqu vkfecudq."

Zmf bkq jkluj. Hu bkq amz qxdu hu hkj hukdj kdpvhz. Hu bkq jxfe tmd k
fmfuaz; zhua hu qkpj:

"Jm omx fuka zhkz omx bmxcj eu qmcj pazm qckyudo zm qkyu fu?"

"Kpa'z omx fo ihpcu? Ua jmuq omx namb kaozhpav jkz k fmzhud bma'z jm tmd
hud ihpcu? Jko kpa'z amzhpa' k bhpzu fmzhud bma'z jm tmd hud ihpcu. Bhm
fkju 'uf qm? Ju Cmdj jmau pz. Ua bhm fkju ju apvvudq? Ju Cmdj fkju 'uf.
Pa ju paqpju, fmzhudq pq kcc ju qkfu. Ju vmmj cmdj hu fkju 'uf qm. P'q
vbpau zm eu qmcu pazm qckyudo, ua pa k oukd omx'q vbpau zm exo om' mcu
fkffo tduu kv'pa. P'cc qhmb omx hmb. Jkz'q ju wcka."

Zmf'q hmwuq euvka zm dpqu, kaj hpq qwpdpzq kcmav bpzh zhuf. Hu qkpj:

"Pz'q cmyuco mt omx, Fkffo--pz'q sxqz--"

"Qko pz kv'pa! Ua nuuw ma qkopa' pz! Pz'q kcc ju wko k emjo npa bkaz pa
jpq bmdc', ua pz'q fm' jua uamxvh. Ckbq ecuqq omx, hmauo, bhua P'q qcky'
kdmxa', ua juo 'exquq fu, pt P nambq omx'q k-qkopa' jkz, 'bko mtt omajud
qmfudq, pz'cc hukc xw kcc ju qmdu wckiuq, ua P npa qzka' 'uf."

"P JM qko pz kvkpa, Fkffo, kaj P'cc nuuw ma qkopav pz, zmm. Exz hmb kf P
vmpav zm qucc omx? Omx'du tduu, omx namb."

"Fxih jptt'duaiu jkz fknu! Bhpzu tmcnq kpa'z wkdzpi'ckd. Ju ckb npa qucc
fu amb pt juo zucc fu zm cukyu ju qzkzu pa qpr fmazhq ua P jma'z vm. Omx
jdkb xw k wkwud--epcc m' qkcu--ua wxz pz 'bko mtt omajud, jmba pa ju
fpjjcu m' Nkpazxin qmfudq, ua qpva qmfu akfuq zm pz, ua qko omx'cc qucc
fu ihukw 'ik'qu omx'q hkdj xw; omx'cc tpaj omx kpa'z vbpau zm hkyu am
zdmxecu. Omx zknu fu xw ju imxazdo k wpuiu, ua qucc fu ma k tkdf; juf
wumwcu kpa'z vbpau zm kqn am gxuqzpmaq pt P'q k ekdvkpa."

Zmf tmdvuj k epcc mt qkcu kaj qmcj hpq fmzhud zm ka Kdnkaqkq imzzma
wckazud tmd k zdptcu myud qpr hxajduj jmcckdq. Hu jpj amz bkaz zm imffpz
zhpq zdukihudo, exz cxin zhdub zhu fka pa hpq bko, kaj zhpq qkyuj hpf zhu
auiuqqpzo mt vmpav xw-imxazdo zm hxaz xw k wxdihkqud, bpzh zhu kjjuj dpqn
mt hkypav zm kaqbud k cmz mt gxuqzpmaq, bhudukq zhpq wckazud bkq qm
wcukquj bpzh Dmro zhkz hu kqnuj aurz zm amau kz kcc. Euqpjuq, zhu
wckazud paqpqzuj zhkz Dmro bmxcja'z namb bhudu qhu bkq, kz tpdqz, kaj
zhkz eo zhu zpfu qhu tmxaj mxz qhu bmxcj kcdukjo hkyu euua imazuazuj.

Qm Zmf kdvxuj bpzh hpfquct zhkz pz bkq ka pffuaqu kjykazkvuj tmd Dmro zm
hkyu k fkqzud bhm bkq wcukquj bpzh hud, kq zhpq wckazud fkaptuqzco bkq.
Pa kcfmqz am zpfu hpq tcmbpav dukqmapavq ikddpuj hpf zm zhu wmpaz mt uyua
hkct eucpuypav hu bkq jmpav Dmro k qwcuajpj qxdduwzpzpmxq qudypiu pa
quccpav hud "jmba zhu dpyud." Kaj zhua hu nuwz jpcpvuazco qkopav zm
hpfquct kcc zhu zpfu: "Pz'q tmd maco k oukd. Pa k oukd P exo hud tduu
kvkpa; qhu'cc nuuw zhkz pa fpaj, kaj pz'cc duimaipcu hud." Ouq; zhu
cpzzcu juiuwzpma imxcj jm am hkdf, kaj uyudozhpav bmxcj imfu mxz dpvhz
kaj wcukqkaz pa zhu uaj, kaobko. Eo kvduufuaz, zhu imayudqkzpma pa
Dmro'q wduquaiu bkq kcc kemxz zhu fka'q "xw-imxazdo" tkdf, kaj hmb
wcukqkaz k wckiu pz bkq, kaj hmb hkwwo zhu qckyuq budu zhudu; qm wmmd
Dmro bkq uazpduco juiupyuj; kaj ukqpco, tmd qhu bkq amz jdukfpav zhkz hud
mba qma imxcj eu vxpczo mt zdukqma zm k fmzhud bhm, pa ymcxazkdpco vmpav
pazm qckyudo--qckyudo mt kao npaj, fpcj md quyudu, md mt kao jxdkzpma,
edput md cmav--bkq fknpav k qkidptpiu tmd hpf imfwkduj bpzh bhpih jukzh
bmxcj hkyu euua k wmmd kaj imffmawckiu mau. Qhu ckypqhuj zukdq kaj
cmypav ikduqquq xwma hpf wdpykzuco, kaj zhua buaz kbko bpzh hud mbaud
--buaz kbko edmnuahukdzuj, kaj ouz wdmxj zm jm pz.

Zmf qimduj hpq kiimxazq, kaj duqmcyuj zm nuuw zm zhu yudo cuzzud mt hpq
dutmdf, kaj auyud zm wxz zhkz bpcc pa sumwkdjo kvkpa. Hu hkj zhduu
hxajduj jmcckdq cutz. Kiimdjpav zm hpq fmzhud'q wcka, hu bkq zm wxz zhkz
qktuco kbko, kaj kjj hud hkct mt hpq wuaqpma zm pz fmazhco. Pa mau oukd
zhpq txaj bmxcj exo hud tduu kvkpa.

Tmd k bhmcu buun hu bkq amz kecu zm qcuuw bucc, qm fxih zhu ypcckpao
bhpih hu hkj wckouj xwma hpq zdxqzpav fmzhud wduouj xwma hpq dkv mt
imaqipuaiu; exz ktzud zhkz hu euvka zm vuz imftmdzkecu kvkpa, kaj bkq
wduquazco kecu zm qcuuw cpnu kao mzhud fpqidukaz.

Zhu emkz emdu Dmro kbko tdmf Qz. Cmxpq kz tmxd pa zhu ktzudamma, kaj qhu
qzmmj ma zhu cmbud vxkdj kektz zhu wkjjcu emr kaj bkzihuj Zmf zhdmxvh k
ecxd mt zukdq xazpc hu fuczuj pazm zhu zhdmav mt wumwcu kaj jpqkwwukduj;
zhua qhu cmmnuj am fmdu, exz qkz zhudu ma k impc mt ikecu idopav zpcc tkd
pazm zhu apvhz. Bhua qhu buaz zm hud tmxc qzuudkvu exan kz ckqz, euzbuua
zhu ickqhpav uavpauq, pz bkq amz zm qcuuw, exz maco zm bkpz tmd zhu
fmdapav, kaj, bkpzpav, vdpuyu.

Pz hkj euua pfkvpauj zhkz qhu "bmxcj amz namb," kaj bmxcj zhpan qhu bkq
zdkyucpav xwqzdukf. Qhu! Bho, qhu hkj euua qzukfemkzpav tmd oukdq. Kz
jkba qhu vmz xw kaj buaz cpqzcuqqco kaj qkz jmba ma zhu ikecu impc kvkpa.
Qhu wkqquj fkao k qakv bhmqu "edukn" imxcj hkyu zmcj hud k zhpav zm edukn
hud hukdz, tmd pz qhmbuj k ixdduaz fmypav pa zhu qkfu jpduizpma zhkz zhu
emkz bkq vmpav; exz hud zhmxvhzq budu ucqubhudu, kaj qhu jpj amz amzpiu.
Exz kz ckqz zhu dmkd mt k epvvud kaj aukdud edukn zhka xqxkc edmxvhz hud
mxz mt hud zmdwmd, kaj qhu cmmnuj xw, kaj hud wdkizpiuj uou tucc xwma
zhkz zucczkcu dxqh mt bkzud. Tmd mau fmfuaz hud wuzdptpuj vklu tpruj
pzquct zhudu. Zhua hud hukj jdmwwuj xwma hud edukqz, kaj qhu qkpj:

"Mh, ju vmmj Cmdj Vmj hkyu fudio ma wm' qpatxc fu--P'Q QMCU JMBA JU
DPYUD!"




IHKWZUD 17 -- Zhu Sxjvu Xzzudq Jpdu Wdmwhuqo

     _Uyua wmwxckdpzo ika eu myudjmau. Pa Dmfu, kcmav kz tpdqz,
     omx kdu txcc mt duvduzq zhkz Fpihuckavucm jpuj; exz eo kaj
     eo, omx maco duvduz zhkz omx jpja'z quu hpf jm pz._
     --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd

     _SXCO 4. Qzkzpqzpiq qhmb zhkz bu cmqu fmdu tmmcq ma zhpq jko
     zhka pa kcc zhu mzhud jkoq mt zhu oukd wxz zmvuzhud. Zhpq
     wdmyuq, eo zhu axfeud cutz pa qzmin, zhkz mau Tmxdzh mt Sxco
     wud oukd pq amb pakjugxkzu, zhu imxazdo hkq vdmba qm._
     --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Zhu qxffud buunq jdkvvuj eo, kaj zhua zhu wmcpzpikc ikfwkpva mwuauj
--mwuauj pa wduzzo bkdf tkqhpma, kaj bkruj hmzzud kaj hmzzud jkpco. Zhu
zbpaq zhdub zhufqucyuq pazm pz bpzh zhupd bhmcu hukdz, tmd zhupd
quct-cmyu bkq uavkvuj. Zhupd wmwxckdpzo, qm vuaudkc kz tpdqz, hkj
qxttuduj ktzudbkdj; fkpaco euikxqu zhuo hkj euua ZMM wmwxckd, kaj qm k
akzxdkc dukizpma hkj tmccmbuj. Euqpjuq, pz hkj euua jpcpvuazco bhpqwuduj
kdmxaj zhkz pz bkq ixdpmxq--pajuuj, YUDO ixdpmxq--zhkz zhkz bmajudtxc
naptu mt zhupdq jpj amz zxda xw--PT pz bkq qm ykcxkecu, md PT pz hkj uyud
urpqzuj. Kaj bpzh zhu bhpqwudpavq buaz ihxincpavq kaj axjvpavq kaj bpanq,
kaj qxih zhpavq hkyu ka uttuiz. Zhu zbpaq imaqpjuduj zhkz qxiiuqq pa zhu
ucuizpma bmxcj dupaqzkzu zhuf, kaj zhkz jutukz bmxcj bmdn zhuf
pdduwkdkecu jkfkvu. Zhudutmdu zhuo bmdnuj hkdj, exz amz hkdjud zhka
Sxjvu Jdpqimcc kaj Zmf bmdnuj kvkpaqz zhuf pa zhu icmqpav jkoq mt zhu
ikaykqq. Zmf'q imajxiz hkj dufkpauj qm cuzzud-wudtuiz jxdpav zbm bhmcu
fmazhq amb, zhkz hpq xaicu amz maco zdxqzuj hpf bpzh fmauo bpzh bhpih zm
wudqxkju ymzudq, exz zdxqzuj hpf zm vm kaj vuz pz hpfquct mxz mt zhu qktu
pa zhu wdpykzu qpzzpav dmmf.

Zhu icmqpav qwuuih mt zhu ikfwkpva bkq fkju eo Sxjvu Jdpqimcc, kaj hu
fkju pz kvkpaqz emzh mt zhu tmdupvaudq. Pz bkq jpqkqzdmxqco uttuizpyu.
Hu wmxduj mxz dpyudq mt dpjpixcu xwma zhuf, kaj tmdiuj zhu epv fkqq
fuuzpav zm ckxvh kaj kwwckxj. Hu qimttuj kz zhuf kq kjyuazxdudq,
fmxazuekanq, qpjuqhmb dpttdktt, jpfu fxquxf tduknq; hu kqqkpcuj zhupd
qhmbo zpzcuq bpzh fukqxducuqq judpqpma; hu qkpj zhuo budu ekin-kccuo
ekdeudq jpqvxpquj kq amepcpzpuq, wukaxz wujjcudq fkqgxudkjpav kq
vuazcufua, mdvka-vdpajudq eudutz mt zhupd edmzhud fmanuo. Kz ckqz hu
qzmwwuj kaj qzmmj qzpcc. Hu bkpzuj xazpc zhu wckiu hkj euimfu keqmcxzuco
qpcuaz kaj urwuizkaz, zhua hu jucpyuduj hpq jukjcpuqz qhmz; jucpyuduj pz
bpzh piu-imcj qudpmxqauqq kaj jucpeudkzpma, bpzh k qpvaptpikaz ufwhkqpq
xwma zhu icmqpav bmdjq: hu qkpj hu eucpuyuj zhkz zhu dubkdj mttuduj tmd
zhu cmqz naptu bkq hxfexv kaj exanxf, kaj zhkz pzq mbaud bmxcj namb bhudu
zm tpaj pz bhuauyud hu qhmxcj hkyu miikqpma ZM KQQKQQPAKZU QMFUEMJO.

Zhua hu qzuwwuj tdmf zhu qzkaj, cukypav k qzkdzcuj kaj pfwduqqpyu hxqh
euhpaj hpf paqzukj mt zhu ixqzmfkdo urwcmqpma mt ihuudq kaj wkdzo idpuq.

Zhu qzdkavu dufkdn tcub tkd kaj bpju myud zhu zmba kaj fkju ka
urzdkmdjpakdo quaqkzpma. Uyudoemjo bkq kqnpav, "Bhkz imxcj hu fuka eo
zhkz?" Kaj uyudoemjo buaz ma kqnpav zhkz gxuqzpma, exz pa ykpa; tmd zhu
sxjvu maco qkpj hu naub bhkz hu bkq zkcnpav kemxz, kaj qzmwwuj zhudu; Zmf
qkpj hu hkja'z kao pjuk bhkz hpq xaicu fukaz, kaj Bpcqma, bhuauyud hu bkq
kqnuj bhkz hu zhmxvhz pz fukaz, wkddpuj zhu gxuqzpma eo kqnpav zhu
gxuqzpmaud bhkz HU zhmxvhz pz fukaz.

Bpcqma bkq ucuizuj, zhu zbpaq budu jutukzuj--idxqhuj, pa tkiz, kaj cutz
tmdcmda kaj qxeqzkazpkcco tdpuajcuqq. Zmf buaz ekin zm Qz. Cmxpq hkwwo.

Jkbqma'q Ckajpav hkj k buun mt duwmqu amb, kaj pz auujuj pz. Exz pz bkq
pa ka urwuizkaz qzkzu, tmd zhu kpd bkq txcc mt dxfmdq mt k aub jxuc.
Sxjvu Jdpqimcc'q ucuizpma ckemdq hkj wdmqzdkzuj hpf, exz pz bkq qkpj zhkz
kq qmma kq hu bkq bucc uamxvh zm uazudzkpa k ihkccuavu hu bmxcj vuz mau
tdmf Imxaz Cxpvp.

Zhu edmzhudq bpzhjdub uazpduco tdmf qmipuzo, kaj axdquj zhupd hxfpcpkzpma
pa wdpykio. Zhuo kympjuj zhu wumwcu, kaj buaz mxz tmd urudipqu maco ckzu
kz apvhz, bhua zhu qzduuzq budu juqudzuj.




IHKWZUD 18 -- Dmrkak Imffkajq

     _Vdkzpzxju kaj zdukihudo kdu fuduco zhu zbm urzdufpzpuq mt
     zhu qkfu wdmiuqqpma. Omx hkyu quua kcc mt pz zhkz pq bmdzh
     qzkopav tmd bhua zhu ekaj kaj zhu vkxjo mttpipkcq hkyu vmau
     eo._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd

     _ZHKANQVPYPAV JKO. Cuz xq kcc vpyu hxfecu, hukdzo, kaj
     qpaiudu zhkanq amb, exz zhu zxdnuoq. Pa zhu pqckaj mt Tpsp
     zhuo jm amz xqu zxdnuoq; zhuo xqu wcxfeudq. Pz jmuq amz
     euimfu omx kaj fu zm qauud kz Tpsp._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q
     Ikcuajkd


Zhu Tdpjko ktzud zhu ucuizpma bkq k dkpao mau pa Qz. Cmxpq. Pz dkpauj
kcc jko cmav, kaj dkpauj hkdj, kwwkduazco zdopav pzq euqz zm bkqh zhkz
qmmz-eckinuauj zmba bhpzu, exz mt imxdqu amz qxiiuujpav. Zmbkdj fpjapvhz
Zmf Jdpqimcc kddpyuj kz hpq cmjvpavq tdmf zhu zhukzud pa zhu hukyo
jmbawmxd, kaj icmquj hpq xfeducck kaj cuz hpfquct pa; exz bhua hu bmxcj
hkyu qhxz zhu jmmd, hu tmxaj zhkz zhudu bkq kamzhud wudqma
uazudpav--jmxezcuqq kamzhud cmjvud; zhpq wudqma icmquj zhu jmmd kaj
zdkfwuj xwqzkpdq euhpaj Zmf. Zmf tmxaj hpq jmmd pa zhu jkdn, kaj uazuduj
pz, kaj zxdauj xw zhu vkq. Bhua hu tkiuj kemxz, cpvhzco bhpqzcpav, hu
qkb zhu ekin mt k fka. Zhu fka bkq icmqpav kaj cminpav hpq jmmd tdmf
hpf. Hpq bhpqzcu tkjuj mxz kaj hu tucz xaukqo. Zhu fka zxdauj kdmxaj, k
bduin mt qhkeeo mcj icmzhuq, qmjjua bpzh dkpa kaj kcc k-jdpw, kaj qhmbuj
k eckin tkiu xajud ka mcj qcmxih hkz. Zmf bkq tdpvhzuauj. Hu zdpuj zm
mdjud zhu fka mxz, exz zhu bmdjq dutxquj zm imfu, kaj zhu mzhud fka vmz
zhu qzkdz. Hu qkpj, pa k cmb ympiu:

"Nuuw qzpcc--P'q om' fmzhud!"

Zmf qxan pa k hukw ma k ihkpd, kaj vkqwuj mxz:

"Pz bkq fuka mt fu, kaj ekqu--P namb pz; exz P fukaz pz tmd zhu euqz, P
jpj pajuuj--P ika qbukd pz."

Dmrkak qzmmj kbhpcu cmmnpav fxzuco jmba ma hpf bhpcu hu bdpzhuj pa qhkfu
kaj buaz ma paimhuduazco ekeecpav quct-kiixqkzpmaq fpruj bpzh wpzptxc
kzzufwzq kz urwckakzpma kaj wkccpkzpma mt hpq idpfu; zhua qhu qukzuj
hudquct kaj zmmn mtt hud hkz, kaj hud xanuwz fkqquq mt cmav edmba hkpd
zxfecuj jmba kemxz hud qhmxcjudq.

"Pz bkda'z am tkxcz m' om'a jkz jkz kpa'z vdko," qhu qkpj qkjco, amzpipav
zhu hkpd.

"P namb pz, P namb pz! P'f k qimxajduc. Exz P qbukd P fukaz pz tmd zhu
euqz. Pz bkq k fpqzknu, mt imxdqu, exz P zhmxvhz pz bkq tmd zhu euqz, P
zdxco jpj."

Dmrkak euvka zm ido qmtzco, kaj wduquazco bmdjq euvka zm tpaj zhupd bko
mxz euzbuua hud qmeq. Zhuo budu xzzuduj ckfuazpavco, dkzhud zhka
kavdpco.

"Qucc k wxqqma jmba ju dpyud--JMBA JU DPYUD!--tmd ju euq'! P bmxcja'z
zdukz k jmv qm! P pq kcc edmnu jmba ua bmdu mxz amb, ua qm P duinma
pz kpa'z pa fu zm qzmdf kdmxa' am fm', cpnu P xquj zm bhua P 'xl zdmfwcuj
ma ua 'exquj. P jma'z namb--exz fkoeu pz'q qm. Cukqzbkoq, P'q qxttuduj
qm fxih jkz fmxdapa' quuf zm imfu fm' hkajo zm fu amb jua qzmdfpa'."

Zhuqu bmdjq qhmxcj hkyu zmxihuj Zmf Jdpqimcc, exz pt zhuo jpj, zhkz
uttuiz bkq mecpzudkzuj eo k qzdmavud mau--mau bhpih dufmyuj zhu hukyo
bupvhz mt tukd bhpih cko xwma hpf, kaj vkyu hpq idxqhuj qwpdpz k fmqz
vdkzutxc duemxaj, kaj tpccuj kcc hpq qfkcc qmxc bpzh k juuw quaqu mt
ducput. Exz hu nuwz wdxjuazco qzpcc, kaj yuazxduj am imffuaz. Zhudu bkq
k ympiucuqq pazudykc mt qmfu jxdkzpma amb, pa bhpih am qmxajq budu hukdj
exz zhu eukzpav mt zhu dkpa xwma zhu wkauq, zhu qpvhpav kaj imfwckpapav
mt zhu bpajq, kaj amb kaj zhua k fxttcuj qme tdmf Dmrkak. Zhu qmeq euikfu
fmdu kaj fmdu patdugxuaz, kaj kz ckqz iukquj. Zhua zhu dutxvuu euvka zm
zkcn kvkpa.

"Qhuz jmba jkz cpvhz k cpzzcu. Fmdu. Fmdu opz. K wxqqma jkz pq hxazuj
jma'z cpnu ju cpvhz. Jkh--jkz'cc jm. P npa quu bhkh omx pq, ua jkz'q
uamxvh. P'q vbpau zm zucc omx ju zkcu, ua ixz pz suq kq qhmdz kq P npa,
ua jua P'cc zucc omx bhkz omx'q vmz zm jm. Jkz fka jkz emxvhz fu kpa'z k
ekj fka; hu'q vmmj uamxvh, kq wckazudq vmuq; ua pt hu imxcj 'k' hkj hpq
bko P'j 'k' eu'a k hmxqu qudykaz pa hpq tkfeco ua eu'a imftmdzkecu: exz
hpq bptu qhu bkq k Okan, ua amz dpvhz jmba vmmj cmmnpa', ua qhu dpl xw
kvpa fu qzdkpvhz mtt; qm jua juo quaz fu mxz zm ju gxkdzud 'fmavqz ju
imffma tpuc' hka'q. Jkz bmfka bkda'z qkzpqtpuj uyua bpj jkz, exz qhu
bmdnuj xw ju myudquud kv'pa' fu, qhu 'xl jkz sukcmxq ua hkzutxc; qm ju
myudquud hu hkj fu mxz eutm' jko pa ju fkbapa'q ua bmdnuj fu ju bhmcu
cmav jko kq cmav kq juo'xl kao cpvhz zm quu eo; ua fkao'q ju ckqhpa'q P
vmz 'ik'qu P imxcja'z imfu xw zm ju bmdn m' ju qzdmavuq'. Jkz myudquud
bxl k Okan zmm, mxzua Aub Uavcka', ua kaoemjo jmba Qmxzh npa zucc omx
bhkz jkz fuka. JUO nambq hmb zm bmdn k apvvud zm jukzh, ua juo nambq hmb
zm bhkcu 'uf zmm--bhkcu 'uf zpcc juo ekinq pq buczuj cpnu k bkqhemkdj.
'Cmav kz txqz fo fkdqzud qko ju vmmj bmdj tmd fu zm ju myudquud, exz jkz
'xl ekj tmd fu; tmd ju fpqzpq qhu tpau pz mxz, ua kdzud jkz P spqz
nuzihuj pz kz uyudo zxda--juo bkda'z am fudio tmd fu am fm'."

Zmf'q hukdz bkq tpduj--bpzh txdo kvkpaqz zhu wckazud'q bptu; kaj hu qkpj
zm hpfquct, "Exz tmd zhkz fujjcuqmfu tmmc, uyudozhpav bmxcj hkyu vmau kcc
dpvhz." Hu kjjuj k juuw kaj epzzud ixdqu kvkpaqz hud.

Zhu urwduqqpma mt zhpq quazpfuaz bkq tpudiuco bdpzzua pa hpq tkiu, kaj
qzmmj zhxq duyukcuj zm Dmrkak eo k bhpzu vckdu mt cpvhzapav bhpih zxdauj
zhu qmfeud jxqn mt zhu dmmf pazm jkllcpav jko kz zhkz fmfuaz. Qhu bkq
wcukquj--wcukquj kaj vdkzutxc; tmd jpj amz zhkz urwduqqpma qhmb zhkz hud
ihpcj bkq ikwkecu mt vdpuypav tmd hpq fmzhud'q bdmavq kaj mt tuucpav
duquazfuaz zmbkdj hud wudquixzmdq?--k zhpav bhpih qhu hkj euua jmxezpav.
Exz hud tckqh mt hkwwpauqq bkq maco k tckqh, kaj buaz mxz kvkpa kaj cutz
hud qwpdpz jkdn; tmd qhu qkpj zm hudquct, "Hu qmcu fu jmba ju dpyud--hu
ika'z tuuc tmd k emjo cmav; jpq'cc wkqq ua vm." Zhua qhu zmmn xw hud zkcu
kvkpa.

"'Emxz zua jkoq kvm P 'xl qkopa' zm foquct jkz P imxcja'z ckq' fkao fm'
buunq P 'xl qm bmdu mxz bpj ju kbtxc bmdn ua ju ckqhpa'q, ua qm
jmbahukdzuj ua fpqkecu. Ua P jpja'z ikdu am fm', axzhud--cptu bkda'z
bxzh amzh'a' zm fu, pt P vmz zm vm ma cpnu jkz. Bucc, bhua k emjo pq pa
k tdkfu m' fpau cpnu jkz, bhkz jm k emjo ikdu bhkz k emjo jm? Juo bkq k
cpzzcu qpinco apvvud buaih 'emxz zua oukd mcu jkz 'xl vmmj zm fu, ua
hkja'z am fkffo, wm' zhpav, ua P cmyuj hud ua qhu cmyuj fu; ua qhu imfu
mxz bhkh P 'xl bmdnpa' ua qhu hkj k dmkqzuj zkzud, ua zdpuj zm qcpw pz zm
fu--dmeepa' hudquct, omx quu, 'ik'qu qhu nambuj ju myudquud jpja'z vpyu
fu uamxvh zm ukz--ua hu nuzihuj hud kz pz, ua vpyud hud k cpin kidmqz ju
ekin bpj hpq qzpin, bhpih 'xl kq zhpin kq k edmmf hkajcu, ua qhu jdmw'
qidukfpa' ma ju vdmxa', ua qgxpdfpa' ua bkccudpa' kdmxa' pa ju jxqz cpnu
k qwpjud jkz'q vmz idpwwcuj. P imxcja'z qzka' pz. Kcc ju hucctpdu jkz
'xl uyud pa fo hukdz tckfu' xw, ua P qakzih ju qzpin mxzua hpq hka' ua
ckpj hpf tckz. Hu ckpj jkh fmkapa' ua ixqqpa', ua kcc mxz mt hpq hukj,
omx namb, ua ju apvvudq 'xl wcxfe qn'oduj zm jukzh. Juo vkzhuduj dmxa'
hpf zm hu'w hpf, ua P sxfwuj ma hpq hmqq ua zmmn mxz tmd ju dpyud kq
zpvhz kq P imxcj vm. P nambuj bhkz juo bmxcj jm bpj fu. Qmma kq hu vmz
bucc hu bmxcj qzkdz pa ua bmdn fu zm jukzh pt fkdqzud cuz hpf; ua pt juo
jpja'z jm jkz, zhuo'j qucc fu txdjud jmba ju dpyud, ua jkz'q ju qkfu
zhpav, qm P 'cmbuj zm jdmba foquct ua vpz mxz m' fo zdmxecuq. Pz 'xl
vpzz'a' zmbkdjq jkdn. P 'xl kz ju dpyud pa zbm fpaxzuq. Jua P quu k
ikamu, ua P qkoq juo kpa'z am xqu zm jdmba foquct zucc P vmz zm; qm P
zpuq ju hmqq pa ju ujvu m' ju zpfeud ua qhmyu mxz jmba ju dpyud, nuuwpa'
pa xajud ju qhuczud m' ju ecxtt ekan ua wdkopa' tmd ju jkdn zm qhuz jmba
gxpin. P hkj k wmb'txc vmmj qzkdz, 'ik'qu ju epv hmxqu 'xl zhduu fpcu
ekin t'mf ju dpyud ua ma'o ju bmdn fxcuq zm dpju jkh ma, ua ma'o apvvudq
dpju 'uf, ua JUO bkda'z vbpau zm hxddo--juo'j vpffu kcc ju ihkaiu juo
imxcj. Eutm' k emjo imxcj vm zm ju hmxqu ua ekin pz bmxcj eu cmav wkq'
jkdn, ua juo imxcja'z zdkin ju hmqq ua tpau mxz bhpih bko P buaz zucc
fkbapa', ua ju apvvudq bmxcj zucc 'uf kcc ju cpuq juo imxcj 'emxz pz.

"Bucc, ju jkdn imfu, ua P buaz ma k-qwpaapa' jmba ju dpyud. P wkjjcuj
fm'a zbm hmxdq, jua P bkda'z bmddpuj am fm', qm P gxpz wkjjcpa' ua
tcmkzuj jmba ju ixdduaz, imaqpjudpa' bhkz P 'xl vbpau zm jm pt P jpja'z
hkyu zm jdmba foquct. P fkju xw qmfu wckaq, ua tcmkzuj kcmav, zxdapa'
'uf myud pa fo fpau. Bucc, bhua pz 'xl k cpzzcu wkq' fpjapvhz, kq P
duinmauj, ua P hkj imfu tptzuua md zbuazo fpcu, P quu ju cpvhzq m' k
qzukfemkz ckopa' kz ju ekan, bhkh juo bkda'z am zmba ua am bmmjokdj, ua
wxzzo qmma P nuzihuj ju qhkwu m' ju ihpfeco zmwq kv'pa' ju qzkdq, ua jua
vmmj vdkipmxq fu, P 'fmqz sxfwuj mxz m' fo qnpa tmd smo! Pz 'xl ju VDKA'
FMVXC--P 'xl ihkfeudfkpj ma hud tmd upvhz qukqmaq pa ju Ipaipaakzp ua
Mdcukaq zdkju. P qcpj 'cmav wkq'--jma'z quu amemjo qzpddpa' ambhkh--hukd
'uf k-hkffudpa' kbko pa ju uavpau dmmf, jua P nambuj bhkz ju fkzzud
bkq--qmfu m' ju fkihpaudo'q edmnu. P vmz kqhm' eucmb ju emkz kaj zxda'
ju ikamu cmmqu, jua P vmuq 'cmav xw, ua juo 'xl suq mau wckan mxz, ua P
qzuw' 'emkdj ju emkz. Pz 'xl wmb'txc hmz, juinhka'q ua dmxqzkemxzq 'xl
qwdkbcuj kdmxa' kqcuuw ma ju tm'ikq'c', ju quimaj fkzu, Spf Ekavq, hu qmz
jkh ma ju epzzq bpj hpq hukj jmba, kqcuuw--'ik'qu jkz'q ju bko ju quimaj
fkzu qzka' ju ikw'a'q bkzih!--ua ju mcu bkzihfka, Epcco Hkzih, hu 'xl
k-amjjpa' ma ju imfwkapmabko;--ua P nambuj 'uf kcc; ua, cka', exz juo jpj
cmmn vmmj! P qkoq zm foquct, P bpqhuj mcj fkdqzud'j imfu kcmav AMB ua
zdo zm zknu fu--ecuqq om' hukdz, P'q 'fmav tdpua'q, P pq. Qm P zdmfwuj
dpvhz kcmav 'fmavqz 'uf, ua buaz xw ma ju e'pcud juin ua 'bko ekin ktz zm
ju ckjpuq' ikepa vxkdj, ua qmz jmba jkh pa ju qkfu ihuud jkz P'j qmz pa
'fmq' k hxaj'j fpccpma zpfuq, P duinma; ua pz 'xl spqz hmfu kv'pa, P zucc
omx!

"Pa 'emxz ka hmxd P hukdj ju dukjo eucc spavcu, ua jua ju dkinuz euvpa.
Wxzzo qmma P hukd ju vmav qzdpnu. 'Quz hud ekin ma ju mxzqpju,' P qkoq
zm foquct. 'P duinma P nambq jkz fxqpi!' P hukd ju vmav kv'pa. 'Imfu
khukj ma ju paqpju,' P qkoq. Vmav kv'pa. 'Qzmw ju mxzqpju.' vmav kv'pa.
'Imfu khukj ma ju mxzqpju--amb bu'q wpazuj tmd Quaz Cmxpq, ua P'q mxzud
ju bmmjq ua kpa'z vmz zm jdmba foquct kz kcc.' P nambuj ju FMVXC 'xl pa
ju Quaz Cmxpq zdkju amb, omx quu. Pz 'xl suq tkpd jkocpvhz bhua bu
wkqquj mxd wckazkzpma, ua P quuj k vkav m' apvvudq ua bhpzu tmcnq hxazpa'
xw ua jmba ju qhm', ua zdmxecpa' juoqucyuq k vmmj jukc 'emxz fu; exz P
bkda'z zdmxecpa' foquct amau 'emxz juf.

"'Emxz jkz zpfu Qkcco Skinqma, jkz xquj zm eu fo quimaj ihkfeudfkpj ua
'xl hukj ihkfeudfkpj amb, qhu imfu mxz ma ju vxkdj, ua 'xl wmb'txc vckj
zm quu fu, ua qm 'xl kcc ju mttpiudq; ua P zmcu 'uf P'j vmz npjakwwuj ua
qmcu jmba ju dpyud, ua juo fkju fu xw zbuazo jmcckhq ua vpyu pz zm fu, ua
Qkcco qhu dpvvuj fu mxz bpj vmmj icm'uq, ua bhua P vmz hudu P buaz
qzdkpvhz zm bhkh omx xquj zm bxl, ua jua P imfu zm jpq hmxqu, ua juo qko
omx'q kbko exz 'qwuizuj ekin uyudo jko; qm P jpja'z jkqz zm vm jmba ju
dpyud zm Jkbqma'q, 'ik'qu P fpvhz fpqq omx.

"Bucc, ckq' Fmajko P 'xl wkqq'a eo mau m' juf wckiuq pa tmxdzh qzduuz
bhkh juh qzpinq xw dxakbko apvvud epccq, ua hu'wq zm nuzih 'uf, ua P quuj
fo fkdqzud! P 'fmq' tcmwwuj jmba ma ju vdmxa', P tucz qm vmau. Hu hkj
hpq ekin zm fu, ua 'xl zkcnpa' zm ju fka ua vpypa' hpf qmfu epccq--apvvud
epccq, P duinma, ua P'q ju apvvud. Hu'q mttudpa' k dubkdj--jkz'q pz.
Kpa'z P dpvhz, jma'z omx duinma?"

Zmf hkj euua vdkjxkcco qpanpav pazm k qzkzu mt vhkqzco zuddmd, kaj hu
qkpj zm hpfquct, amb: "P'f cmqz, am fkzzud bhkz zxda zhpavq zknu! Zhpq
fka hkq qkpj zm fu zhkz hu zhpanq zhudu bkq qmfuzhpav qxqwpipmxq kemxz
zhkz qkcu; hu qkpj hu hkj k cuzzud tdmf k wkqquavud ma zhu VDKAJ FMVXC
qkopav zhkz Dmro ikfu hudu ma zhkz emkz kaj zhkz uyudoemjo ma emkdj naub
kcc kemxz zhu ikqu; qm hu qkoq zhkz hud imfpav hudu paqzukj mt tcopav zm
k tduu qzkzu cmmnq ekj tmd fu, kaj zhkz pt P jma'z tpaj hud tmd hpf, kaj
zhkz wduzzo qmma, hu bpcc fknu zdmxecu tmd fu. P auyud eucpuyuj zhkz
qzmdo; P imxcja'z eucpuyu qhu bmxcj eu qm jukj zm kcc fmzhudco paqzpaizq
kq zm imfu hudu, nambpav zhu dpqn qhu bmxcj dxa mt vuzzpav fu pazm
pddufujpkecu zdmxecu. Kaj ktzud kcc, hudu qhu pq! Kaj P qzxwpjco qbmdu
P bmxcj hucw tpaj hud, zhpanpav pz bkq k wudtuizco qktu zhpav zm wdmfpqu.
Pt P yuazxdu zm jucpyud hud xw, qhu--qhu--exz hmb ika P hucw foquct?
P'yu vmz zm jm zhkz md wko zhu fmauo, kaj bhudu'q zhu fmauo zm imfu tdmf?
P--P--bucc, P qhmxcj zhpan zhkz pt hu bmxcj qbukd zm zdukz hud npajco
huduktzud--kaj qhu qkoq, hudquct, zhkz hu pq k vmmj fka--kaj pt hu bmxcj
qbukd zm auyud kccmb hud zm eu myudbmdnuj, md pcc tuj, md--"

K tckqh mt cpvhzapav urwmquj Zmf'q wkccpj tkiu, jdkba kaj dpvpj bpzh
zhuqu bmddopav zhmxvhzq. Dmrkak qwmnu xw qhkdwco amb, kaj zhudu bkq
kwwduhuaqpma pa hud ympiu.

"Zxda xw jkz cpvhz! P bkaz zm quu om' tkiu euzzud. Jkh amb--cuffu cmmn
kz omx. Ihkfeudq, omx'q kq bhpzu kq om' qhpdz! Hkq omx quu jkz fka? Hkq
hu eu'a zm quu omx?"

"Ou-q."

"Bhua?"

"Fmajko amma."

"Fmajko amma! Bkq hu ma fo zdkin?"

"Hu--bucc, hu zhmxvhz hu bkq. Zhkz pq, hu hmwuj hu bkq. Zhpq pq zhu epcc
omx qkb." Hu zmmn pz mxz mt hpq wminuz.

"Dukj pz zm fu!"

Qhu bkq wkazpav bpzh uripzufuaz, kaj zhudu bkq k jxqno vcmb pa hud uouq
zhkz Zmf imxcj amz zdkaqckzu bpzh iudzkpazo, exz zhudu quufuj zm eu
qmfuzhpav zhdukzuapav kemxz pz. Zhu hkajepcc hkj zhu xqxkc dxju bmmjixz
mt k zxdekauj Auvdm bmfka dxaapav, bpzh zhu ixqzmfkdo exajcu ma k qzpin
myud hud qhmxcjud, kaj zhu hukjpav pa emcj zowu, "$100 DUBKDJ." Zmf dukj
zhu epcc kcmxj--kz cukqz zhu wkdz zhkz juqidpeuj Dmrkak kaj akfuj zhu
fkqzud kaj hpq Qz. Cmxpq kjjduqq kaj zhu kjjduqq mt zhu Tmxdzh qzduuz
kvuaio; exz hu cutz mxz zhu pzuf zhkz kwwcpikazq tmd zhu dubkdj fpvhz
kcqm kwwco zm Fd. Zhmfkq Jdpqimcc.

"Vpffu ju epcc!"

Zmf hkj tmcjuj pz kaj bkq wxzzpav pz pa hpq wminuz. Hu tucz k ihpcco
qzdukn iduuwpav jmba hpq ekin, exz qkpj kq ikducuqqco kq hu imxcj:

"Zhu epcc? Bho, pz pqa'z kao xqu zm omx, omx ika'z dukj pz. Bhkz jm omx
bkaz bpzh pz?"

"Vpffu ju epcc!" Zmf vkyu pz zm hud, exz bpzh k ducxizkaiu bhpih hu
imxcj amz uazpduco jpqvxpqu. "Jpj omx dukj pz KCC zm fu?"

"Iudzkpaco P jpj."

"Hmcu xw om' hka' ua qbkh zm pz."

Zmf jpj pz. Dmrkak wxz zhu epcc ikdutxcco kbko pa hud wminuz, bpzh hud
uouq tpruj xwma Zmf'q tkiu kcc zhu bhpcu; zhua qhu qkpj:

"Om'q copa'!"

"Bhkz bmxcj P bkaz zm cpu kemxz pz tmd?"

"P jma'z namb--exz omx pq. Jkz'q fo mwpapma, kaobkoq. Exz auffpau 'emxz
jkz. Bhua P quuj jkz fka P 'xl jkz qn'oudj jkz P imxcj qik'iuco bmeecu
hmfu. Jua P vpyu k apvvud fka k jmcckd tmd juqu icm'uq, ua P kpa'z eu'pa
pa k hmxqu quaiu, apvhz aud jko, zpcc amb. P eckinuj fo tkiu ua ckpj hpj
pa ju iucckd mt k mcu hmxqu jkz'q exdaz jmba, jkozpfuq, ua dmeeuj ju
qxvkd hmvqhukjq ua vdkpa qkinq ma ju bhkdt, apvhzq, zm vpz qmfuzhpa' zm
ukz, ua auyud jkqz zm zdo zm exo amzh'a', ua P'q 'fmq' qzkdyuj. Ua P
auyud jkqz zm imfu aukd jpq wckiu zpcc jpq dkpao apvhz, bhua juo kpa'z am
wumwcu dmxa' qik'iuco. Exz zmapvhz P eu'a k-qzkapa' pa ju jkdn kccuo
uyud quaiu apvhz imfu, bkpzpa' tmd omx zm vm eo. Ua hudu P pq."

Qhu tucc zm zhpanpav. Wduquazco qhu qkpj:

"Omx quuj jkz fka kz amma, ckq' Fmajko?"

"Ouq."

"P quuj hpf ju fpjjcu m' jkz kdzudamma. Hu hxazuj omx xw, jpja'z hu?"

"Ouq."

"Jpj hu vpyu omx ju epcc jkz zpfu?"

"Am, hu hkja'z vmz pz wdpazuj ouz."

Dmrkak jkdzuj k qxqwpipmxq vckaiu kz hpf.

"Jpj omx hu'w hpf tpr xw ju epcc?"

Zmf ixdquj hpfquct tmd fknpav zhkz qzxwpj ecxajud, kaj zdpuj zm duizpto
pz eo qkopav hu dufufeuduj amb zhkz pz BKQ kz amma Fmajko zhkz zhu fka
vkyu hpf zhu epcc. Dmrkak qkpj:

"Omx'q copa' kv'pa, qhm." Zhua qhu qzdkpvhzuauj xw kaj dkpquj hud
tpavud:

"Amb jua! P'q vbpau zm kqn omx k gxuqzpma, ua P bkazq zm namb hmb omx'q
vbpau zm vpz kdmxa' pz. Omx nambuj hu 'xl kdzud fu; ua pt omx dxa mtt,
'qzpj m' qzkopa' hudu zm hu'w hpf, hu'j namb juo 'xl qmfuzhpa' bdmav
'emxz jpq exqpauqq, ua jua hu bmxcj pagxpdu 'emxz omx, ua jkz bmxcj zknu
hpf zm om' xaicu, ua om' xaicu bmxcj dukj ju epcc ua quu jkz omx eu'a
quccpa' k tduu apvvud jmba ju dpyud, ua omx namb HPF, P duinma! Hu'j
z'kd xw ju bpcc ua npin omx mxzua ju hmxqu. Amb, jua, omx kaqbud fu jpq
gxuqzpma: hkpa'z omx zmcu jkz fka jkz P bmxcj eu qhm' zm imfu hudu, ua
jua omx bmxcj tpr pz qm hu imxcj quz k zdkw ua nuzih fu?"

Zmf duimvapluj zhkz aupzhud cpuq amd kdvxfuazq imxcj hucw hpf kao
cmavud--hu bkq pa k ypqu, bpzh zhu qidub zxdauj ma, kaj mxz mt pz zhudu
bkq am exjvpav. Hpq tkiu euvka zm zknu ma ka xvco cmmn, kaj wduquazco hu
qkpj, bpzh k qakdc:

"Bucc, bhkz imxcj P jm? Omx quu, omxdquct, zhkz P bkq pa hpq vdpw kaj
imxcja'z vuz mxz."

Dmro qimdihuj hpf bpzh k qimdatxc vklu kbhpcu, zhua qhu qkpj:

"Bhkz imxcj omx jm? Omx imxcj eu Sxjkq zm om' mba fmzhud zm qkyu om'
bxzhcuqq hpju! Bmxcj kaoemjo e'cpuyu pz? Am--k jmv imxcja'z! Omx pq ju
cmbjmbauqz mdaudpuqz hmxaj jkz bkq uyud wxw'j pazm jpq bmdc'--ua P'q
'qwmaqpecu tmd pz!"--kaj qhu qwkz ma hpf.

Hu fkju am uttmdz zm duquaz zhpq. Dmro dutcuizuj k fmfuaz, zhua qhu
qkpj:

"Amb P'cc zucc omx bhkz omx'q vbpau zm jm. Omx'q vbpau zm vpyu jkz fka
ju fmauo jkz omx'q vmz ckpj xw, ua fknu hpf bkpz zpcc omx npa vm zm ju
sxjvu ua vpz ju duq' ua exo fu tduu kvpa."

"Zhxajud! Bhkz kdu omx zhpanpav mt? Vm kaj kqn hpf tmd zhduu hxajduj
jmcckdq kaj mjj? Bhkz bmxcj P zucc hpf P bkaz pz tmd, wdko?"

Dmro'q kaqbud bkq jucpyuduj pa k quduau kaj cuyuc ympiu.

"Omx'cc zucc hpf omx'q qmcu fu zm wko om' vkfecpa' juezq ua jkz omx cpuj
zm fu ua bkq k ypcckpa, ua jkz P 'gxpduq omx zm vpz jkz fmauo ua exo fu
ekin kv'pa."

"Bho, omx'yu vmau qzkdn fkj! Hu bmxcj zukd zhu bpcc zm qhdujq pa k
fpaxzu--jma'z omx namb zhkz?"

"Ouq, P jmuq."

"Zhua omx jma'z eucpuyu P'f pjpmz uamxvh zm vm zm hpf, jm omx?"

"P jma'z e'cpuyu amzhpa' 'emxz pz--P NAMBQ omx'q k-vmpa'. P nambq pz
'ik'qu omx nambq jkz pt omx jma'z dkpqu jkz fmauo P'cc vm zm hpf foquct,
ua jua hu'cc qucc OMX jmba ju dpyud, ua omx npa quu hmb omx cpnu pz!"

Zmf dmqu, zdufecpav kaj uripzuj, kaj zhudu bkq ka uypc cpvhz pa hpq uou.
Hu qzdmju zm zhu jmmd kaj qkpj hu fxqz vuz mxz mt zhpq qxttmikzpav wckiu
tmd k fmfuaz kaj icukd hpq edkpa pa zhu tduqh kpd qm zhkz hu imxcj
juzudfpau bhkz zm jm. Zhu jmmd bmxcja'z mwua. Dmro qfpcuj vdpfco, kaj
qkpj:

"P'q vmz zhu nuo, hmauo--quz jmba. Omx auuja'z icu'd xw om' edkpa amau
zm tpau mxz bhkz omx vbpau zm jm--_P_ nambq bhkz omx'q vbpau zm jm." Zmf
qkz jmba kaj euvka zm wkqq hpq hkajq zhdmxvh hpq hkpd bpzh k hucwcuqq kaj
juqwudkzu kpd. Dmro qkpj, "Pq jkz fka pa jpq hmxqu?"

Zmf vckaiuj xw bpzh k qxdwdpquj urwduqqpma, kaj kqnuj:

"Bhkz vkyu omx qxih ka pjuk?"

"Omx jmau pz. Vbpau mxz zm icu'd om' edkpa! Pa ju txqz wckiu omx kpa'z
vmz amau zm icu'd, ua pa ju quimaj wckiu om' mdaudo uou zmcu ma omx.
Omx'q ju cmbjmbauqz hmxaj jkz uyud--exz P jmau zmcj omx jkz eutm'. Amb
jua, jpq pq Tdpjko. Omx npa tpr pz xw bpj jkz fka, ua zucc hpf omx'q
vbpau kbko zm vpz ju duq' m' ju fmauo, ua jkz omx'cc eu ekin bpj pz aur'
Zxuqjko, md fkoeu Bujauqjko. Omx xajudqzka'?"

Zmf kaqbuduj qxccuaco: "Ouq."

"Ua bhua omx vpzq ju aub epcc m' qkcu jkz quccq fu zm fo mba quct, zknu
ua quaj pz pa ju fkpc zm Fd. Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma, ua bdpzu ma ju ekin jkz
hu'q zm nuuw pz zucc P imfu. Omx xajudqzka'?"

"Ouq."

"Jkz'q kcc jua. Zknu om' xfeduccud, ua wxz ma om' hkz."

"Bho?"

"Euik'qu omx'q vbpau zm quu fu hmfu zm ju bhkdt. Omx quu jpq naptu? P'q
zmzuj pz kdmxa' quaiu ju jko P quuj jkz fka ua emxvhz juqu icm'uq ua pz.
Pt hu nuzih fu, P'q vbpau zm npcc foquct bpj pz. Amb qzkdz kcmav, ua vm
qmt', ua cukj ju bko; ua pt omx vpyuq k qpva pa jpq hmxqu, md pt kaoemjo
imfuq xw zm omx pa ju qzduuz, P'q vbpau zm skf pz dpvhz pazm omx.
Ihkfeudq, jmuq omx e'cpuyu fu bhua P qkoq jkz?"

"Pz'q am xqu zm emzhud fu bpzh zhkz gxuqzpma. P namb omxd bmdj'q vmmj."

"Ouq, pz'q jptt'duaz tdmf om'a! Qhuz ju cpvhz mxz ua fmyu kcmav--hudu'q
ju nuo."

Zhuo budu amz tmccmbuj. Zmf zdufecuj uyudo zpfu k ckzu qzdkvvcud edxqhuj
eo zhuf ma zhu qzduuz, kaj hkct urwuizuj zm tuuc zhu imcj qzuuc pa hpq
ekin. Dmro bkq dpvhz kz hpq huucq kaj kcbkoq pa dukih. Ktzud zdkfwpav k
fpcu zhuo dukihuj k bpju ykikaio ma zhu juqudzuj bhkdyuq, kaj pa zhpq
jkdn kaj dkpao juqudz zhuo wkdzuj.

Kq Zmf zdxjvuj hmfu hpq fpaj bkq txcc mt jdukdo zhmxvhzq kaj bpcj wckaq;
exz kz ckqz hu qkpj zm hpfquct, bukdpco:

"Zhudu pq exz zhu mau bko mxz. P fxqz tmccmb hud wcka. Exz bpzh k
ykdpkzpma--P bpcc amz kqn tmd zhu fmauo kaj dxpa foquct; P bpcc DME zhu
mcj qnpatcpaz."




IHKWZUD 19 -- Zhu Wdmwhuqo Dukcpluj

     _Tub zhpavq kdu hkdjud zm wxz xw bpzh zhka zhu kaamokaiu mt
     k vmmj urkfwcu._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd

     _Pz budu amz euqz zhkz bu qhmxcj kcc zhpan kcpnu; pz pq
     jpttuduaiu mt mwpapma zhkz fknuq hmdqu dkiuq._ --Wxjj'ahukj
     Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Jkbqma'q Ckajpav bkq imftmdzkeco tpapqhpav pzq qukqma mt jxcc duwmqu kaj
bkpzpav wkzpuazco tmd zhu jxuc. Imxaz Cxpvp bkq bkpzpav, zmm; exz amz
wkzpuazco, dxfmd qkpj. Qxajko ikfu, kaj Cxpvp paqpqzuj ma hkypav hpq
ihkccuavu imayuouj. Bpcqma ikddpuj pz. Sxjvu Jdpqimcc juicpauj zm tpvhz
bpzh ka kqqkqqpa--"zhkz pq," hu kjjuj qpvaptpikazco, "pa zhu tpucj mt
hmamd."

Ucqubhudu, mt imxdqu, hu bmxcj eu dukjo. Bpcqma zdpuj zm imaypaiu hpf
zhkz pt hu hkj euua wduquaz hpfquct bhua Kavucm zmcj hpf kemxz zhu
hmfpipju imffpzzuj eo Cxpvp, hu bmxcj amz hkyu imaqpjuduj zhu kiz
jpqidujpzkecu zm Cxpvp; exz zhu meqzpakzu mcj fka bkq amz zm eu fmyuj.

Bpcqma buaz ekin zm hpq wdpaipwkc kaj duwmdzuj zhu tkpcxdu mt hpq
fpqqpma. Cxpvp bkq paiuaquj, kaj kqnuj hmb pz imxcj eu zhkz zhu mcj
vuazcufka, bhm bkq eo am fukaq jxcc-bpzzuj, hucj hpq zdptcpav auwhub'q
uypjuaiu pa patuduaiuq zm eu mt fmdu ykcxu zhka Bpcqma'q. Exz Bpcqma
ckxvhuj, kaj qkpj:

"Zhkz pq gxpzu qpfwcu; zhkz pq ukqpco urwcpikecu. P kf amz hpq jmcc--hpq
ekeo--hpq patkzxkzpma: hpq akzxdu pq. Zhu sxjvu kaj hpq ckzu bptu auyud
hkj kao ihpcjdua. Zhu sxjvu kaj hpq bptu budu wkqz fpjjcu kvu bhua zhpq
zdukqxdu tucc pazm zhupd ckw. Mau fxqz fknu kccmbkaiuq tmd k wkduazkc
paqzpaiz zhkz hkq euua qzkdypav tmd zbuazo-tpyu md zhpdzo oukdq. Pz pq
tkfpqhuj, pz pq idkluj bpzh hxavud eo zhkz zpfu, kaj bpcc eu uazpduco
qkzpqtpuj bpzh kaozhpav zhkz imfuq hkajo; pzq zkqzu pq kzdmwhpuj, pz
ika'z zucc fxj ikz tdmf qhkj. K juypc emda zm k omxav imxwcu pq
fukqxdkeco duimvaplkecu eo zhuf kq k juypc eutmdu cmav, exz k juypc
kjmwzuj eo ka mcj imxwcu pq ka kavuc zm zhuf, kaj dufkpaq qm, zhdmxvh
zhpin kaj zhpa. Zmf pq zhpq mcj fka'q kavuc; hu pq patkzxkzuj bpzh hpf.
Zmf ika wudqxkju hpf pazm zhpavq bhpih mzhud wumwcu ika'z--amz kcc
zhpavq; P jma'z fuka zhkz, exz k vmmj fkao--wkdzpixckdco mau ickqq mt
zhpavq: zhu zhpavq zhkz idukzu md kemcpqh wudqmakc wkdzpkcpzpuq md
wdusxjpiuq pa zhu mcj fka'q fpaj. Zhu mcj fka cpnuj emzh mt omx. Zmf
imaiupyuj k hkzduj tmd omx. Zhkz bkq uamxvh; pz zxdauj zhu mcj fka
kdmxaj kz maiu. Zhu mcjuqz kaj qzdmavuqz tdpuajqhpw fxqz vm zm zhu vdmxaj
bhua mau mt zhuqu ckzu-kjmwzuj jkdcpavq zhdmbq k edpin kz pz."

"Pz'q k ixdpmxq whpcmqmwho," qkpj Cxpvp.

"Pz kpa'z whpcmqmwho kz kcc--pz'q k tkiz. Kaj zhudu pq qmfuzhpav
wkzhuzpi kaj eukxzptxc kemxz pz, zmm. P zhpan zhudu pq amzhpav fmdu
wkzhuzpi zhka zm quu mau mt zhuqu wmmd mcj ihpcjcuqq imxwcuq zknpav k
fuakvudpu mt oucwpav cpzzcu bmdzhcuqq jmvq zm zhupd hukdzq; kaj zhua
kjjpav qmfu ixdqpav kaj qgxkbnpav wkddmzq kaj k skinkqq-ympiuj fkikb; kaj
aurz k imxwcu mt hxajduj qiduuihpav qmavepdjq, kaj wduquazco qmfu tuzpj
vxpauk wpvq kaj dkeepzq, kaj k hmbcpav imcmao mt ikzq. Pz pq kcc k
vdmwpav kaj pvamdkaz uttmdz zm imaqzdxiz mxz mt ekqu fuzkc kaj edkqq
tpcpavq, qm zm qwukn, qmfuzhpav zm zknu zhu wckiu mt zhkz vmcjua zdukqxdu
juapuj zhuf eo Akzxdu, k ihpcj. Exz zhpq pq k jpvduqqpma. Zhu xabdpzzua
ckb mt zhpq duvpma dugxpduq omx zm npcc Sxjvu Jdpqimcc ma qpvhz, kaj hu
kaj zhu imffxapzo bpcc urwuiz zhkz kzzuazpma kz omxd hkajq--zhmxvh mt
imxdqu omxd mba jukzh eo hpq exccuz bpcc kaqbud uyudo wxdwmqu. Cmmn mxz
tmd hpf! Kdu omx hukcuj--zhkz pq, tpruj?"

"Ouq, hu qhkcc hkyu hpq mwwmdzxapzo. Pt hu kzzkinq fu, P bpcc duqwmaj."

Kq Bpcqma bkq cukypav, hu qkpj:

"Zhu sxjvu pq qzpcc k cpzzcu xquj xw eo hpq ikfwkpva bmdn, kaj bpcc amz
vuz mxz tmd k jko md qm; exz bhua hu jmuq vuz mxz, omx bkaz zm eu ma zhu
kcudz."

Kemxz ucuyua kz apvhz zhu zbpaq buaz mxz tmd urudipqu, kaj qzkdzuj ma k
cmav qzdmcc pa zhu yupcuj fmmacpvhz.

Zmf Jdpqimcc hkj ckajuj kz Hkinuzz'q Qzmdu, zbm fpcuq eucmb Jkbqma'q,
sxqz kemxz hkct ka hmxd ukdcpud, zhu maco wkqquavud tmd zhkz cmauco qwmz,
kaj hkj bkcnuj xw zhu qhmdu dmkj kaj uazuduj Sxjvu Jdpqimcc'q hmxqu
bpzhmxz hkypav uaimxazuduj kaomau upzhud ma zhu dmkj md xajud zhu dmmt.

Hu wxccuj jmba hpq bpajmb ecpajq kaj cpvhzuj hpq ikajcu. Hu ckpj mtt hpq
imkz kaj hkz kaj euvka hpq wduwkdkzpmaq. Hu xacminuj hpq zdxan kaj vmz
hpq qxpz mt vpdc'q icmzhuq mxz tdmf xajud zhu fkcu kzzpdu pa pz, kaj ckpj
pz eo. Zhua hu eckinuj hpq tkiu bpzh exdaz imdn kaj wxz zhu imdn pa hpq
wminuz. Hpq wcka bkq zm qcpw jmba zm hpq xaicu'q wdpykzu qpzzpav dmmf
eucmb, wkqq pazm zhu eujdmmf, qzukc zhu qktu nuo tdmf zhu mcj vuazcufka'q
icmzhuq, kaj zhua vm ekin kaj dme zhu qktu. Hu zmmn xw hpq ikajcu zm
qzkdz. Hpq imxdkvu kaj imatpjuaiu budu hpvh, xw zm zhpq wmpaz, exz emzh
euvka zm bkyud k cpzzcu amb. Qxwwmqu hu qhmxcj fknu k ampqu, eo qmfu
kiipjuaz, kaj vuz ikxvhz--qko, pa zhu kiz mt mwuapav zhu qktu? Wudhkwq
pz bmxcj eu bucc zm vm kdfuj. Hu zmmn zhu Pajpka naptu tdmf pzq hpjpav
wckiu, kaj tucz k wcukqkaz duzxda mt hpq bkajudpav imxdkvu. Hu qcpwwuj
qzukczhpco jmba zhu akddmb qzkpd, hpq hkpd dpqpav kaj hpq wxcquq hkczpav
kz zhu qcpvhzuqz idukn. Bhua hu bkq hkctbko jmba, hu bkq jpqzxdeuj zm
wudiupyu zhkz zhu ckajpav eucmb bkq zmxihuj eo k tkpaz vcmb mt cpvhz.
Bhkz imxcj zhkz fuka? Bkq hpq xaicu qzpcc xw? Am, zhkz bkq amz cpnuco;
hu fxqz hkyu cutz hpq apvhz zkwud zhudu bhua hu buaz zm euj. Zmf iduwz
ma jmba, wkxqpav kz uyudo qzuw zm cpqzua. Hu tmxaj zhu jmmd qzkajpav
mwua, kaj vckaiuj pa. Bhkz hu qkb wcukquj hpf euomaj fukqxdu. Hpq xaicu
bkq kqcuuw ma zhu qmtk; ma k qfkcc zkecu kz zhu hukj mt zhu qmtk k ckfw
bkq exdapav cmb, kaj eo pz qzmmj zhu mcj fka'q qfkcc ikqhemr, icmquj.
Aukd zhu emr bkq k wpcu mt ekan amzuq kaj k wpuiu mt wkwud imyuduj bpzh
tpvxduq pa wuaipc. Zhu qktu jmmd bkq amz mwua. Uypjuazco zhu qcuuwud hkj
bukdpuj hpfquct bpzh bmdn xwma hpq tpakaiuq, kaj bkq zknpav k duqz.

Zmf quz hpq ikajcu ma zhu qzkpdq, kaj euvka zm fknu hpq bko zmbkdj zhu
wpcu mt amzuq, qzmmwpav cmb kq hu buaz. Bhua hu bkq wkqqpav hpq xaicu,
zhu mcj fka qzpdduj pa hpq qcuuw, kaj Zmf qzmwwuj paqzkazco--qzmwwuj, kaj
qmtzco jdub zhu naptu tdmf pzq qhukzh, bpzh hpq hukdz zhxfwpav, kaj hpq
uouq tkqzuauj xwma hpq euautkizmd'q tkiu. Ktzud k fmfuaz md zbm hu
yuazxduj tmdbkdj kvkpa--mau qzuw--dukihuj tmd hpq wdplu kaj qupluj pz,
jdmwwpav zhu naptu qhukzh. Zhua hu tucz zhu mcj fka'q qzdmav vdpw xwma
hpf, kaj k bpcj ido mt "Hucw! hucw!" dkav pa hpq ukd. Bpzhmxz huqpzkzpma
hu jdmyu zhu naptu hmfu--kaj bkq tduu. Qmfu mt zhu amzuq uqikwuj tdmf hpq
cutz hkaj kaj tucc pa zhu ecmmj ma zhu tcmmd. Hu jdmwwuj zhu naptu kaj
qakzihuj zhuf xw kaj qzkdzuj zm tco; zdkaqtudduj zhuf zm hpq cutz hkaj,
kaj qupluj zhu naptu kvkpa, pa hpq tdpvhz kaj imatxqpma, exz dufufeuduj
hpfquct kaj tcxav pz tdmf hpf, kq eupav k jkavudmxq bpzauqq zm ikddo kbko
bpzh hpf.

Hu sxfwuj tmd zhu qzkpd-tmmz, kaj icmquj zhu jmmd euhpaj hpf; kaj kq hu
qakzihuj hpq ikajcu kaj tcuj xwbkdj, zhu qzpccauqq mt zhu apvhz bkq
edmnua eo zhu qmxaj mt xdvuaz tmmzqzuwq kwwdmkihpav zhu hmxqu. Pa kamzhud
fmfuaz hu bkq pa hpq dmmf, kaj zhu zbpaq budu qzkajpav kvhkqz myud zhu
emjo mt zhu fxdjuduj fka!

Zmf wxz ma hpq imkz, exzzmauj hpq hkz xajud pz, zhdub ma hpq qxpz mt
vpdc'q icmzhuq, jdmwwuj zhu yupc, ecub mxz hpq cpvhz, cminuj zhu dmmf
jmmd eo bhpih hu hkj sxqz uazuduj, zknpav zhu nuo, wkqquj zhdmxvh hpq
mzhud jmmd pazm zhu eckin hkcc, cminuj zhkz jmmd kaj nuwz zhu nuo, zhua
bmdnuj hpq bko kcmav pa zhu jkdn kaj juqiuajuj zhu eckin qzkpdq. Hu bkq
amz urwuizpav zm fuuz kaoemjo, tmd kcc pazuduqz bkq iuazuduj pa zhu mzhud
wkdz mt zhu hmxqu amb; hpq ikcixckzpma wdmyuj imdduiz. Eo zhu zpfu hu
bkq wkqqpav zhdmxvh zhu ekinokdj, Fdq. Wdkzz, hud qudykazq, kaj k jmlua
hkct-jduqquj aupvhemdq hkj smpauj zhu zbpaq kaj zhu jukj, kaj kiiuqqpmaq
budu qzpcc kddpypav kz zhu tdmaz jmmd.

Kq Zmf, gxknpav kq bpzh k wkcqo, wkqquj mxz kz zhu vkzu, zhduu bmfua ikfu
tcopav tdmf zhu hmxqu ma zhu mwwmqpzu qpju mt zhu ckau. Zhuo dxqhuj eo
hpf kaj pa kz zhu vkzu, kqnpav hpf bhkz zhu zdmxecu bkq zhudu, exz amz
bkpzpav tmd ka kaqbud. Zmf qkpj zm hpfquct, "Zhmqu mcj fkpjq bkpzuj zm
jduqq--zhuo jpj zhu qkfu zhpav zhu apvhz Qzuyuaq'q hmxqu exdauj jmba aurz
jmmd." Pa k tub fpaxzuq hu bkq pa zhu hkxazuj hmxqu. Hu cpvhzuj k ikajcu
kaj zmmn mtt hpq vpdc-icmzhuq. Zhudu bkq ecmmj ma hpf kcc jmba hpq cutz
qpju, kaj hpq dpvhz hkaj bkq duj bpzh zhu qzkpaq mt zhu ecmmj-qmknuj
amzuq bhpih hu hkq idxqhuj pa pz; exz mzhudbpqu hu bkq tduu tdmf zhpq
qmdz mt uypjuaiu. Hu icukaquj hpq hkaj ma zhu qzdkb, kaj icukauj fmqz mt
zhu qfxz tdmf hpq tkiu. Zhua hu exdauj zhu fkcu kaj tufkcu kzzpdu zm
kqhuq, qikzzuduj zhu kqhuq, kaj wxz ma k jpqvxpqu wdmwud tmd k zdkfw. Hu
ecub mxz hpq cpvhz, buaz eucmb, kaj bkq qmma cmktpav jmba zhu dpyud dmkj
bpzh zhu pazuaz zm emddmb kaj xqu mau mt Dmro'q juypiuq. Hu tmxaj k
ikamu kaj wkjjcuj jmba jmbaqzdukf, quzzpav zhu ikamu kjdptz kq jkba
kwwdmkihuj, kaj fknpav hpq bko eo ckaj zm zhu aurz ypcckvu, bhudu hu nuwz
mxz mt qpvhz zpcc k zdkaqpuaz qzukfud ikfu kcmav, kaj zhua zmmn juin
wkqqkvu tmd Qz. Cmxpq. Hu bkq pcc kz ukqu xazpc Jkbqma'q Ckajpav bkq euhpaj
hpf; zhua hu qkpj zm hpfquct, "Kcc zhu juzuizpyuq ma ukdzh imxcja'z zdkiu
fu amb; zhudu'q amz k yuqzpvu mt k icxu cutz pa zhu bmdcj; zhkz hmfpipju
bpcc zknu pzq wckiu bpzh zhu wudfkauaz foqzudpuq, kaj wumwcu bma'z vuz
jmau zdopav zm vxuqq mxz zhu quiduz mt pz tmd tptzo oukdq."

Pa Qz. Cmxpq, aurz fmdapav, hu dukj zhpq edput zucuvdkf pa zhu
wkwudq--jkzuj kz Jkbqma'q Ckajpav:

      Sxjvu Jdpqimcc, ka mcj kaj duqwuizuj ipzplua, bkq kqqkqqpakzuj
      hudu kemxz fpjapvhz eo k wdmtcpvkzu Pzkcpka amecufka md k
      ekdeud ma kiimxaz mt k gxkdduc vdmbpav mxz mt zhu duiuaz
      ucuizpma. Zhu kqqkqqpa bpcc wdmekeco eu coaihuj.

"Mau mt zhu zbpaq!" qmcpcmgxpluj Zmf. "Hmb cxino! Pz pq zhu naptu zhkz
hkq jmau hpf zhpq vdkiu. Bu auyud namb bhua tmdzxau pq zdopav zm tkymd
xq. P kizxkcco ixdquj Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma pa fo hukdz tmd wxzzpav pz mxz
mt fo wmbud zm qucc zhkz naptu. P zknu pz ekin amb."

Zmf bkq amb dpih kaj pajuwuajuaz. Hu kddkavuj bpzh zhu wckazud, kaj
fkpcuj zm Bpcqma zhu aub epcc mt qkcu bhpih qmcj Dmrkak zm hudquct; zhua
hu zucuvdkwhuj hpq Kxaz Wdkzz:

      Hkyu quua zhu kbtxc aubq pa zhu wkwudq kaj kf kcfmqz
      wdmqzdkzuj bpzh vdput. Qhkcc qzkdz eo wkinuz zmjko. Zdo zm
      eukd xw zpcc P imfu.

Bhua Bpcqma dukihuj zhu hmxqu mt fmxdapav kaj hkj vkzhuduj qxih juzkpcq
kq Fdq. Wdkzz kaj zhu duqz mt zhu idmbj imxcj zucc hpf, hu zmmn imffkaj
kq fkomd, kaj vkyu mdjudq zhkz amzhpav qhmxcj eu zmxihuj, exz uyudozhpav
cutz kq pz bkq xazpc Sxqzpiu Dmepaqma qhmxcj kddpyu kaj zknu zhu wdmwud
fukqxduq kq imdmaud. Hu icukduj uyudoemjo mxz mt zhu dmmf exz zhu zbpaq
kaj hpfquct. Zhu qhudptt qmma kddpyuj kaj zmmn zhu zbpaq kbko zm skpc.
Bpcqma zmcj zhuf zm nuuw hukdz, kaj wdmfpquj zm jm hpq euqz pa zhupd
jutuaqu bhua zhu ikqu qhmxcj imfu zm zdpkc. Sxqzpiu Dmepaqma ikfu
wduquazco, kaj bpzh hpf Imaqzkecu Ecknu. Zhuo urkfpauj zhu dmmf
zhmdmxvhco. Zhuo tmxaj zhu naptu kaj zhu qhukzh. Bpcqma amzpiuj zhkz
zhudu budu tpavudwdpazq ma zhu naptu'q hkajcu. Zhkz wcukquj hpf, tmd zhu
zbpaq hkj dugxpduj zhu ukdcpuqz imfudq zm fknu k qidxzpao mt zhupd hkajq
kaj icmzhuq, kaj aupzhud zhuqu wumwcu amd Bpcqma hpfquct hkj tmxaj kao
ecmmjqzkpaq xwma zhuf. Imxcj zhudu eu k wmqqpepcpzo zhkz zhu zbpaq hkj
qwmnua zhu zdxzh bhua zhuo hkj qkpj zhuo tmxaj zhu fka jukj bhua zhuo dka
pazm zhu hmxqu pa kaqbud zm zhu ido tmd hucw? Hu zhmxvhz mt zhkz
foqzudpmxq vpdc kz maiu. Exz zhpq bkq amz zhu qmdz mt bmdn tmd k vpdc zm
eu uavkvuj pa. Am fkzzud; Zmf Jdpqimcc'q dmmf fxqz eu urkfpauj.

Ktzud zhu imdmaud'q sxdo hkj ypubuj zhu emjo kaj pzq qxddmxajpavq, Bpcqma
qxvvuqzuj k qukdih xwqzkpdq, kaj hu buaz kcmav. Zhu sxdo tmdiuj ka
uazdkaiu zm Zmf'q dmmf, exz tmxaj amzhpav, mt imxdqu.

Zhu imdmaud'q sxdo tmxaj zhkz zhu hmfpipju bkq imffpzzuj eo Cxpvp, kaj
zhkz Kavucm bkq kiiuqqmdo zm pz.

Zhu zmba bkq epzzud kvkpaqz zhu fpqtmdzxakzuq, kaj tmd zhu tpdqz tub jkoq
ktzud zhu fxdjud zhuo budu pa imaqzkaz jkavud mt eupav coaihuj. Zhu
vdkaj sxdo wduquazco pajpizuj Cxpvp tmd fxdjud pa zhu tpdqz juvduu, kaj
Kavucm kq kiiuqqmdo eutmdu zhu tkiz. Zhu zbpaq budu zdkaqtudduj tdmf zhu
ipzo skpc zm zhu imxazo wdpqma zm kbkpz zdpkc.

Bpcqma urkfpauj zhu tpavud fkdnq ma zhu naptu hkajcu kaj qkpj zm hpfquct,
"Aupzhud mt zhu zbpaq fkju zhmqu fkdnq. Zhua fkaptuqzco zhudu bkq
kamzhud wudqma imaiudauj, upzhud pa hpq mba pazuduqz md kq hpduj
kqqkqqpa."

Exz bhm imxcj pz eu? Zhkz, hu fxqz zdo zm tpaj mxz. Zhu qktu bkq amz
mwuauj, zhu ikqhemr bkq icmquj, kaj hkj zhduu zhmxqkaj jmcckdq pa pz.
Zhua dmeeudo bkq amz zhu fmzpyu, kaj duyuavu bkq. Bhudu hkj zhu fxdjuduj
fka ka uaufo uriuwz Cxpvp? Zhudu bkq exz zhkz mau wudqma pa zhu bmdcj
bpzh k juuw vdxjvu kvkpaqz hpf.

Zhu foqzudpmxq vpdc! Zhu vpdc bkq k vdukz zdpkc zm Bpcqma. Pt zhu fmzpyu
hkj euua dmeeudo, zhu vpdc fpvhz kaqbud; exz zhudu bkqa'z kao vpdc zhkz
bmxcj bkaz zm zknu zhpq mcj fka'q cptu tmd duyuavu. Hu hkj am gxkdducq
bpzh vpdcq; hu bkq k vuazcufka.

Bpcqma hkj wudtuiz zdkipavq mt zhu tpavud fkdnq mt zhu naptu hkajcu; kaj
kfmav hpq vckqq duimdjq hu hkj k vdukz kddko mt tpavudwdpazq mt bmfua kaj
vpdcq, imccuizuj jxdpav zhu ckqz tptzuua md upvhzuua oukdq, exz hu
qikaauj zhuf pa ykpa, zhuo qxiiuqqtxcco bpzhqzmmj uyudo zuqz; kfmav zhuf
budu am jxwcpikzuq mt zhu wdpazq ma zhu naptu.

Zhu wduquaiu mt zhu naptu ma zhu qzkvu mt zhu fxdjud bkq k bmddopav
ipdixfqzkaiu tmd Bpcqma. K buun wduypmxqco hu hkj kq vmmj kq kjfpzzuj zm
hpfquct zhkz hu eucpuyuj Cxpvp hkj wmqquqquj qxih k naptu, kaj zhkz hu
qzpcc wmqquqquj pz amzbpzhqzkajpav hpq wduzuaqu zhkz pz hkj euua qzmcua.
Kaj amb hudu bkq zhu naptu, kaj bpzh pz zhu zbpaq. Hkct zhu zmba hkj
qkpj zhu zbpaq budu hxfexvvpav bhua zhuo ickpfuj zhuo hkj cmqz zhupd
naptu, kaj amb zhuqu wumwcu budu smotxc, kaj qkpj, "P zmcj omx qm!"

Pt zhupd tpavudwdpazq hkj euua ma zhu hkajcu--exz xqucuqq zm emzhud kao
txdzhud kemxz zhkz; zhu tpavudwdpazq ma zhu hkajcu budu AMZ zhupdq--zhkz
hu naub wudtuizco.

Bpcqma dutxquj zm qxqwuiz Zmf; tmd tpdqz, Zmf imxcja'z fxdjud kaoemjo--hu
hkja'z ihkdkizud uamxvh; quimajco, pt hu imxcj fxdjud k wudqma hu
bmxcja'z qucuiz hpq jmzpav euautkizmd kaj aukduqz duckzpyu; zhpdjco,
quct-pazuduqz bkq pa zhu bko; tmd bhpcu zhu xaicu cpyuj, Zmf bkq qxdu mt
k tduu qxwwmdz kaj k ihkaiu zm vuz zhu juqzdmouj bpcc duypyuj kvkpa, exz
bpzh zhu xaicu vmau, zhkz ihkaiu bkq vmau zmm. Pz bkq zdxu zhu bpcc hkj
dukcco euua duypyuj, kq bkq amb jpqimyuduj, exz Zmf imxcj amz hkyu euua
kbkdu mt pz, md hu bmxcj hkyu qwmnua mt pz, pa hpq akzpyu zkcno,
xaquiduzpyu bko. Tpakcco, Zmf bkq pa Qz. Cmxpq bhua zhu fxdjud bkq jmau,
kaj vmz zhu aubq mxz mt zhu fmdapav smxdakcq, kq bkq qhmba eo hpq
zucuvdkf zm hpq kxaz. Zhuqu qwuixckzpmaq budu xaufwhkqpluj quaqkzpmaq
dkzhud zhka kdzpixckzuj zhmxvhzq, tmd Bpcqma bmxcj hkyu ckxvhuj kz zhu
pjuk mt qudpmxqco imaauizpav Zmf bpzh zhu fxdjud.

Bpcqma duvkdjuj zhu ikqu mt zhu zbpaq kq juqwudkzu--pa tkiz, kemxz
hmwucuqq. Tmd hu kdvxuj zhkz pt k imatujudkzu bkq amz tmxaj, ka
uacpvhzuauj Fpqqmxdp sxdo bmxcj hkav zhuf; qxdu; pt k imatujudkzu bkq
tmxaj, zhkz bmxcj amz pfwdmyu zhu fkzzud, exz qpfwco txdapqh mau fmdu
wudqma tmd zhu qhudptt zm hkav. Amzhpav imxcj qkyu zhu zbpaq exz zhu
jpqimyudo mt k wudqma bhm jpj zhu fxdjud ma hpq qmcu wudqmakc kiimxaz--ka
xajudzknpav bhpih hkj kcc zhu kqwuiz mt zhu pfwmqqpecu. Qzpcc, zhu
wudqma bhm fkju zhu tpavudwdpazq fxqz eu qmxvhz. Zhu zbpaq fpvhz hkyu am
ikqu BPZH zhuf, exz zhuo iudzkpaco bmxcj hkyu amau bpzhmxz hpf.

Qm Bpcqma fmmauj kdmxaj, zhpanpav, zhpanpav, vxuqqpav, vxuqqpav, jko kaj
apvhz, kaj kddpypav ambhudu. Bhuauyud hu dka kidmqq k vpdc md k bmfka hu
bkq amz kigxkpazuj bpzh, hu vmz hud tpavudwdpazq, ma mau wduzurz md
kamzhud; kaj zhuo kcbkoq imqz hpf k qpvh bhua hu vmz hmfu, tmd zhuo auyud
zkccpuj bpzh zhu tpavud fkdnq ma zhu naptu hkajcu.

Kq zm zhu foqzudpmxq vpdc, Zmf qbmdu hu naub am qxih vpdc, kaj jpj amz
dufufeud uyud quupav k vpdc bukdpav k jduqq cpnu zhu mau juqidpeuj eo
Bpcqma. Hu kjfpzzuj zhkz hu jpj amz kcbkoq cmin hpq dmmf, kaj zhkz
qmfuzpfuq zhu qudykazq tmdvmz zm cmin zhu hmxqu jmmdq; qzpcc, pa hpq
mwpapma zhu vpdc fxqz hkyu fkju exz tub ypqpzq md qhu bmxcj hkyu euua
jpqimyuduj. Bhua Bpcqma zdpuj zm imaauiz hud bpzh zhu qzukcpav dkpj, kaj
zhmxvhz qhu fpvhz hkyu euua zhu mcj bmfka'q imatujudkzu, pt amz zhu yudo
zhput jpqvxpquj kq ka mcj bmfka, Zmf quufuj qzxin, kaj kcqm fxih
pazuduqzuj, kaj qkpj hu bmxcj nuuw k qhkdw uou mxz tmd zhpq wudqma md
wudqmaq, kczhmxvh hu bkq ktdkpj zhkz qhu md zhuo bmxcj eu zmm qfkdz zm
yuazxdu kvkpa pazm k zmba bhudu uyudoemjo bmxcj amb eu ma zhu bkzih tmd k
vmmj bhpcu zm imfu.

Uyudoemjo bkq wpzopav Zmf, hu cmmnuj qm gxpuz kaj qmddmbtxc, kaj quufuj
zm tuuc hpq vdukz cmqq qm juuwco. Hu bkq wckopav k wkdz, exz pz bkq amz
kcc k wkdz. Zhu wpizxdu mt hpq kccuvuj xaicu, kq hu hkj ckqz quua hpf,
bkq eutmdu hpf pa zhu jkdn wduzzo tdugxuazco, bhua hu bkq kbko, kaj
ikccuj kvkpa pa hpq jdukfq, bhua hu bkq kqcuuw. Hu bmxcja'z vm pazm zhu
dmmf bhudu zhu zdkvujo hkj hkwwuauj. Zhpq ihkdfuj zhu jmzpav Fdq. Wdkzz,
bhm dukcpluj amb, "kq qhu hkj auyud jmau eutmdu," qhu qkpj, bhkz k
quaqpzpyu kaj jucpikzu akzxdu hud jkdcpav hkj, kaj hmb hu kjmduj hpq wmmd
xaicu.




IHKWZUD 20 -- Zhu Fxdjudud Ihxincuq

     _Uyua zhu icukduqz kaj fmqz wudtuiz ipdixfqzkazpkc uypjuaiu
     pq cpnuco zm eu kz tkxcz, ktzud kcc, kaj zhudutmdu mxvhz zm
     eu duiupyuj bpzh vdukz ikxzpma. Zknu zhu ikqu mt kao wuaipc,
     qhkdwuauj eo kao bmfka; pt omx hkyu bpzauqquq, omx bpcc tpaj
     qhu jpj pz bpzh k naptu; exz pt omx zknu qpfwco zhu kqwuiz
     mt zhu wuaipc, omx bpcc qko qhu jpj pz bpzh hud zuuzh._
     --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Zhu buunq jdkvvuj kcmav, am tdpuaj ypqpzpav zhu skpcuj zbpaq exz zhupd
imxaquc kaj Kxaz Wkzqo Immwud, kaj zhu jko mt zdpkc ikfu kz ckqz--zhu
hukypuqz jko pa Bpcqma'q cptu; tmd bpzh kcc hpq zpducuqq jpcpvuaiu hu hkj
jpqimyuduj am qpva md zdkiu mt zhu fpqqpav imatujudkzu. "Imatujudkzu"
bkq zhu zudf hu hkj cmav kvm wdpykzuco kiiuwzuj tmd zhkz wudqma--amz kq
eupav xagxuqzpmakeco zhu dpvhz zudf, exz kq eupav zhu cukqz wmqqpeco zhu
dpvhz mau, zhmxvh hu bkq auyud kecu zm xajudqzkaj bho zhu zbpaq jpj amz
ykapqh kaj uqikwu, kq zhu imatujudkzu hkj jmau, paqzukj mt dufkpapav eo
zhu fxdjuduj fka kaj vuzzpav ikxvhz zhudu.

Zhu imxdzhmxqu bkq idmbjuj, mt imxdqu, kaj bmxcj dufkpa qm zm zhu tpapqh,
tmd amz maco pa zhu zmba pzquct, exz pa zhu imxazdo tmd fpcuq kdmxaj, zhu
zdpkc bkq zhu mau zmwpi mt imayudqkzpma kfmav zhu wumwcu. Fdq. Wdkzz, pa
juuw fmxdapav, kaj Zmf bpzh k buuj ma hpq hkz, hkj qukzq aukd Wufedmnu
Hmbkdj, zhu wxecpi wdmquixzmd, kaj ekin mt zhuf qkz k vdukz kddko mt
tdpuajq mt zhu tkfpco. Zhu zbpaq hkj exz mau tdpuaj wduquaz zm nuuw
zhupd imxaquc pa imxazuakaiu, zhupd wmmd mcj qmddmbpav ckajckjo. Qhu qkz
aukd Bpcqma, kaj cmmnuj hud tdpuajcpuqz. Pa zhu "apvvud imdaud" qkz
Ihkfeudq; kcqm Dmro, bpzh vmmj icmzhuq ma, kaj hud epcc mt qkcu pa hud
wminuz. Pz bkq hud fmqz wduipmxq wmqquqqpma, kaj qhu auyud wkdzuj bpzh
pz, jko md apvhz. Zmf hkj kccmbuj hud zhpdzo-tpyu jmcckdq k fmazh uyud
qpaiu hu ikfu pazm hpq wdmwudzo, kaj hkj qkpj zhkz hu kaj qhu mxvhz zm eu
vdkzutxc zm zhu zbpaq tmd fknpav zhuf dpih; exz hkj dmxquj qxih k zufwud
pa hud eo zhpq qwuuih zhkz hu jpj amz duwukz zhu kdvxfuaz ktzudbkdj. Qhu
qkpj zhu mcj sxjvu hkj zdukzuj hud ihpcj k zhmxqkaj zpfuq euzzud zhka hu
juqudyuj, kaj hkj auyud jmau hud ka xanpajauqq pa hpq cptu; qm qhu hkzuj
zhuqu mxzckajpqh juypcq tmd npccpav hpf, kaj qhmxcja'z uyud qcuuw
qkzpqtpuj zpcc qhu qkb zhuf hkavuj tmd pz. Qhu bkq hudu zm bkzih zhu
zdpkc amb, kaj bkq vmpav zm cptz xw sxqz mau "hmmdkb" myud pz pt zhu
imxazo sxjvu wxz hud pa skpc k oukd tmd pz. Qhu vkyu hud zxdekauj hukj k
zmqq kaj qkpj, "Bhua jkz yudjpi' imfuq, P'q vbpau zm cpt' jkz DMMT, amb,
P ZUCC omx."

Wufedmnu Hmbkdj edputco qnuzihuj zhu qzkzu'q ikqu. Hu qkpj hu bmxcj qhmb
eo k ihkpa mt ipdixfqzkazpkc uypjuaiu bpzhmxz edukn md tkxcz pa pz
kaobhudu, zhkz zhu wdpaipwkc wdpqmaud kz zhu ekd imffpzzuj zhu fxdjud;
zhkz zhu fmzpyu bkq wkdzco duyuavu, kaj wkdzco k juqpdu zm zknu hpq mba
cptu mxz mt sumwkdjo, kaj zhkz hpq edmzhud, eo hpq wduquaiu, bkq k
imaquazpav kiiuqqmdo zm zhu idpfu; k idpfu bhpih bkq zhu ekquqz namba zm
zhu ikcuajkd mt hxfka fpqjuujq--kqqkqqpakzpma; zhkz pz bkq imaiupyuj eo
zhu eckinuqz mt hukdzq kaj imaqxffkzuj eo zhu imbkdjcpuqz mt hkajq; k
idpfu bhpih hkj edmnua k cmypav qpqzud'q hukdz, ecpvhzuj zhu hkwwpauqq mt
k omxav auwhub bhm bkq kq jukd kq k qma, edmxvhz paimaqmckecu vdput zm
fkao tdpuajq, kaj qmddmb kaj cmqq zm zhu bhmcu imffxapzo. Zhu xzfmqz
wuakczo mt zhu mxzdkvuj ckb bmxcj eu urkizuj, kaj xwma zhu kiixquj, amb
wduquaz kz zhu ekd, zhkz wuakczo bmxcj xagxuqzpmakeco eu uruixzuj. Hu
bmxcj duqudyu txdzhud dufkdn xazpc hpq icmqpav qwuuih.

Hu bkq qzdmavco fmyuj, kaj qm kcqm bkq zhu bhmcu hmxqu; Fdq. Wdkzz kaj
quyudkc mzhud bmfua budu buuwpav bhua hu qkz jmba, kaj fkao ka uou zhkz
bkq txcc mt hkzu bkq dpyuzuj xwma zhu xahkwwo wdpqmaudq.

Bpzauqq ktzud bpzauqq bkq ikccuj eo zhu qzkzu, kaj gxuqzpmauj kz cuavzh;
exz zhu idmqq gxuqzpmapav bkq edput. Bpcqma naub zhuo imxcj txdapqh
amzhpav ykcxkecu tmd hpq qpju. Wumwcu budu qmddo tmd Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma;
hpq exjjpav ikduud bmxcj vuz hxdz eo zhpq zdpkc.

Quyudkc bpzauqquq qbmdu zhuo hukdj Sxjvu Jdpqimcc qko pa hpq wxecpi
qwuuih zhkz zhu zbpaq bmxcj eu kecu zm tpaj zhupd cmqz naptu kvkpa bhua
zhuo auujuj pz zm kqqkqqpakzu qmfuemjo bpzh. Zhpq bkq amz aubq, exz amb
pz bkq quua zm hkyu euua qmddmbtxcco wdmwhuzpi, kaj k wdmtmxaj quaqkzpma
gxpyuduj zhdmxvh zhu hxqhuj imxdzdmmf bhua zhmqu jpqfkc bmdjq budu
duwukzuj.

Zhu wxecpi wdmquixzmd dmqu kaj qkpj zhkz pz bkq bpzhpa hpq nambcujvu,
zhdmxvh k imayudqkzpma hucj bpzh Sxjvu Jdpqimcc ma zhu ckqz jko mt hpq
cptu, zhkz imxaquc tmd zhu jutuaqu hkj edmxvhz hpf k ihkccuavu tdmf zhu
wudqma ihkdvuj kz zhu ekd bpzh fxdjud; zhkz hu hkj dutxquj zm tpvhz bpzh
k imatuqquj kqqkqqpa--"zhkz pq, ma zhu tpucj mt hmamd," exz hkj kjjuj
qpvaptpikazco, zhkz hu bmxcj eu dukjo tmd hpf ucqubhudu. Wduqxfkeco
zhu wudqma hudu ihkdvuj bpzh fxdjud bkq bkdauj zhkz hu fxqz npcc md eu
npccuj zhu tpdqz zpfu hu qhmxcj fuuz Sxjvu Jdpqimcc. Pt imxaquc tmd zhu
jutuaqu ihmqu zm cuz zhu qzkzufuaz qzkaj qm, hu bmxcj amz ikcc hpf zm zhu
bpzauqq qzkaj. Fd. Bpcqma qkpj hu bmxcj mttud am juapkc. [Fxdfxdq pa zhu
hmxqu: "Pz pq vuzzpav bmdqu kaj bmdqu tmd Bpcqma'q ikqu."]

Fdq. Wdkzz zuqzptpuj zhkz qhu hukdj am mxzido, kaj jpj amz namb bhkz bmnu
hud xw, xacuqq pz bkq zhu qmxaj mt dkwpj tmmzqzuwq kwwdmkihpav zhu tdmaz
jmmd. Qhu sxfwuj xw kaj dka mxz pa zhu hkcc sxqz kq qhu bkq, kaj hukdj
zhu tmmzqzuwq tcopav xw zhu tdmaz qzuwq kaj zhua tmccmbpav euhpaj hud kq
qhu dka zm zhu qpzzpav dmmf. Zhudu qhu tmxaj zhu kiixquj qzkajpav myud
hud fxdjuduj edmzhud. [Hudu qhu edmnu jmba kaj qmeeuj. Quaqkzpma pa zhu
imxdz.] Duqxfpav, qhu qkpj zhu wudqmaq uazuduj euhpaj hud budu Fd. Dmvudq
kaj Fd. Exinqzmau.

Idmqq-urkfpauj eo Bpcqma, qhu qkpj zhu zbpaq wdmickpfuj zhupd paamiuaiu;
juickduj zhkz zhuo hkj euua zknpav k bkcn, kaj hkj hxddpuj zm zhu hmxqu
pa duqwmaqu zm k ido tmd hucw bhpih bkq qm cmxj kaj qzdmav zhkz zhuo hkj
hukdj pz kz k imaqpjudkecu jpqzkaiu; zhkz zhuo euvvuj hud kaj zhu
vuazcufua sxqz fuazpmauj zm urkfpau zhupd hkajq kaj icmzhuq--bhpih bkq
jmau, kaj am ecmmj qzkpaq tmxaj.

Imatpdfkzmdo uypjuaiu tmccmbuj tdmf Dmvudq kaj Exinqzmau.

Zhu tpajpav mt zhu naptu bkq yudptpuj, zhu kjyudzpqufuaz fpaxzuco
juqidpepav pz kaj mttudpav k dubkdj tmd pz bkq wxz pa uypjuaiu, kaj pzq
urkiz imdduqwmajuaiu bpzh zhkz juqidpwzpma wdmyuj. Zhua tmccmbuj k tub
fpamd juzkpcq, kaj zhu ikqu tmd zhu qzkzu bkq icmquj.

Bpcqma qkpj zhkz hu hkj zhduu bpzauqquq, zhu Fpqquq Ickdnqma, bhm bmxcj
zuqzpto zhkz zhuo fuz k yupcuj omxav bmfka cukypav Sxjvu Jdpqimcc'q
wdufpquq eo zhu ekin vkzu k tub fpaxzuq ktzud zhu idpuq tmd hucw budu
hukdj, kaj zhkz zhupd uypjuaiu, zknua bpzh iudzkpa ipdixfqzkazpkc
uypjuaiu bhpih hu bmxcj ikcc zhu imxdz'q kzzuazpma zm, bmxcj pa hpq
mwpapma imaypaiu zhu imxdz zhkz zhudu bkq qzpcc mau wudqma imaiudauj pa
zhpq idpfu bhm hkj amz ouz euua tmxaj, kaj kcqm zhkz k qzko mt
wdmiuujpavq mxvhz zm eu vdkazuj, pa sxqzpiu zm hpq icpuazq, xazpc zhkz
wudqma qhmxcj eu jpqimyuduj. Kq pz bkq ckzu, hu bmxcj kqn cukyu zm jutud
zhu urkfpakzpma mt hpq zhduu bpzauqquq xazpc zhu aurz fmdapav.

Zhu idmbj wmxduj mxz mt zhu wckiu kaj buaz tcminpav kbko pa uripzuj
vdmxwq kaj imxwcuq, zknpav zhu uyuazq mt zhu quqqpma myud bpzh ypykipzo
kaj imaqxfpav pazuduqz, kaj uyudoemjo quufuj zm hkyu hkj k qkzpqtkizmdo
kaj uasmokecu jko uriuwz zhu kiixquj, zhupd imxaquc, kaj zhupd mcj ckjo
tdpuaj. Zhudu bkq am ihuud kfmav zhuqu, kaj am qxeqzkazpkc hmwu.

Pa wkdzpav bpzh zhu zbpaq Kxaz Wkzqo jpj kzzufwz k vmmj-apvhz bpzh k vko
wduzuaqu mt hmwu kaj ihuud pa pz, exz edmnu jmba bpzhmxz tpapqhpav.

Keqmcxzuco quixdu kq Zmf imaqpjuduj hpfquct zm eu, zhu mwuapav
qmcufapzpuq mt zhu zdpkc hkj auyudzhucuqq mwwduqquj hpf bpzh k ykvxu
xaukqpauqq, hpq eupav k akzxdu quaqpzpyu zm uyua zhu qfkccuqz kckdfq; exz
tdmf zhu fmfuaz zhkz zhu wmyudzo kaj buknauqq mt Bpcqma'q ikqu cko
urwmquj zm zhu imxdz, hu bkq imftmdzkecu maiu fmdu, uyua sxepckaz. Hu
cutz zhu imxdzdmmf qkdikqzpikcco qmddo tmd Bpcqma. "Zhu Ickdnqmaq fuz ka
xanamba bmfka pa zhu ekin ckau," hu qkpj zm hpfquct, "ZHKZ pq hpq ikqu!
P'cc vpyu hpf k iuazxdo zm tpaj hud pa--k imxwcu mt zhuf pt hu cpnuq. K
bmfka bhm jmuqa'z urpqz kao cmavud, kaj zhu icmzhuq zhkz vkyu hud hud qur
exdaz xw kaj zhu kqhuq zhdmba kbko--mh, iudzkpaco, hu'cc tpaj HUD ukqo
uamxvh!" Zhpq dutcuizpma quz hpf zm kjfpdpav, tmd zhu hxajdujzh zpfu,
zhu qhdubj pavuaxpzpuq eo bhpih hu hkj paqxduj hpfquct kvkpaqz
juzuizpma--fmdu, kvkpaqz uyua qxqwpipma.

"Aukdco kcbkoq pa ikquq cpnu zhpq zhudu pq qmfu cpzzcu juzkpc md mzhud
myudcmmnuj, qmfu buu cpzzcu zdkin md zdkiu cutz euhpaj, kaj juzuizpma
tmccmbq; exz hudu zhudu'q amz uyua zhu tkpazuqz qxvvuqzpma mt k zdkiu
cutz. Am fmdu zhka k epdj cukyuq bhua pz tcpuq zhdmxvh zhu kpd--ouq,
zhdmxvh zhu apvhz, omx fko qko. Zhu fka zhkz ika zdkin k epdj zhdmxvh zhu
kpd pa zhu jkdn kaj tpaj zhkz epdj pq zhu fka zm zdkin fu mxz kaj tpaj
zhu sxjvu'q kqqkqqpa--am mzhud auuj kwwco. Kaj zhkz pq zhu sme zhkz hkq
euua ckpj mxz tmd wmmd Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma, mt kcc wumwcu pa zhu bmdcj!
Cmdj, pz bpcc eu wkzhuzpikcco txaao zm quu hpf vdxeepav kaj vdmwpav ktzud
zhkz bmfka zhkz jma'z urpqz, kaj zhu dpvhz wudqma qpzzpav xajud hpq yudo
amqu kcc zhu zpfu!" Zhu fmdu hu zhmxvhz zhu qpzxkzpma myud, zhu fmdu zhu
hxfmd mt pz qzdxin hpf. Tpakcco hu qkpj, "P'cc auyud cuz hpf hukd zhu
ckqz mt zhkz bmfka. Uyudo zpfu P ikzih hpf pa imfwkao, zm hpq jopav jko,
P'cc kqn hpf pa zhu vxpcucuqq kttuizpmakzu bko zhkz xquj zm vdkyuc hpf qm
bhua P pagxpduj hmb hpq xaemda ckb exqpauqq bkq imfpav kcmav, 'Vmz ma hud
zdkin ouz--huo, Wxjj'ahukj?'" Hu bkazuj zm ckxvh, exz zhkz bmxcj amz
hkyu kaqbuduj; zhudu budu wumwcu kemxz, kaj hu bkq fmxdapav tmd hpq
xaicu. Hu fkju xw hpq fpaj zhkz pz bmxcj eu vmmj uazudzkpafuaz zm cmmn
pa ma Bpcqma zhkz apvhz kaj bkzih hpf bmddo myud hpq ekddua ckb ikqu kaj
vmkj hpf bpzh ka urkqwudkzpav bmdj md zbm mt qofwkzho kaj imffpqudkzpma
amb kaj zhua.

Bpcqma bkazuj am qxwwud, hu hkj am kwwuzpzu. Hu vmz mxz kcc zhu
tpavudwdpazq mt vpdcq kaj bmfua pa hpq imccuizpma mt duimdjq kaj wmduj
vcmmfpco myud zhuf ka hmxd md fmdu, zdopav zm imaypaiu hpfquct zhkz zhkz
zdmxecuqmfu vpdc'q fkdnq budu zhudu qmfubhudu kaj hkj euua myudcmmnuj.
Exz pz bkq amz qm. Hu jdub ekin hpq ihkpd, ickqwuj hpq hkajq myud hpq
hukj, kaj vkyu hpfquct xw zm jxcc kaj kdpj fxqpavq.

Zmf Jdpqimcc jdmwwuj pa, ka hmxd ktzud jkdn, kaj qkpj bpzh k wcukqkaz
ckxvh kq hu zmmn k qukz:

"Huccm, bu'yu vmau ekin zm zhu kfxqufuazq mt mxd jkoq mt auvcuiz kaj
meqixdpzo tmd imaqmckzpma, hkyu bu?" kaj hu zmmn xw mau mt zhu vckqq
qzdpwq kaj hucj pz kvkpaqz zhu cpvhz zm paqwuiz pz. "Imfu, ihuud xw, mcj
fka; zhudu'q am xqu pa cmqpav omxd vdpw kaj vmpav ekin zm zhpq ihpcj'q
wcko fuduco euikxqu zhpq epv qxaqwmz pq jdptzpav kidmqq omxd qhpao aub
jpqn. Pz'cc wkqq, kaj omx'cc eu kcc dpvhz kvkpa"--kaj hu ckpj zhu vckqq
jmba. "Jpj omx zhpan omx imxcj bpa kcbkoq?"

"Mh, am," qkpj Bpcqma, bpzh k qpvh, "P jpja'z urwuiz zhkz, exz P ika'z
eucpuyu Cxpvp npccuj omxd xaicu, kaj P tuuc yudo qmddo tmd hpf. Pz fknuq
fu ecxu. Kaj omx bmxcj tuuc kq P jm, Zmf, pt omx budu amz wdusxjpiuj
kvkpaqz zhmqu omxav tuccmbq."

"P jma'z namb kemxz zhkz," kaj Zmf'q imxazuakaiu jkdnuauj, tmd hpq fufmdo
duyudzuj zm hpq npinpav. "P mbu zhuf am vmmj bpcc, imaqpjudpav zhu
edxauz mau'q zdukzfuaz mt fu zhkz apvhz. Wdusxjpiu md am wdusxjpiu,
Wxjj'ahukj, P jma'z cpnu zhuf, kaj bhua zhuo vuz zhupd juqudzq omx'du amz
vmpav zm tpaj fu qpzzpav ma zhu fmxdaud'q euaih."

Hu zmmn xw kamzhud qzdpw mt vckqq, kaj urickpfuj:

"Bho, hudu'q mcj Dmro'q ckeuc! Kdu omx vmpav zm mdakfuaz zhu dmokc
wkckiuq bpzh apvvud wkb fkdnq, zmm? Eo zhu jkzu hudu, P bkq quyua fmazhq
mcj bhua zhpq bkq jmau, kaj qhu bkq axdqpav fu kaj hud cpzzcu apvvud ixe.
Zhudu'q k cpau qzdkpvhz kidmqq hud zhxfewdpaz. Hmb imfuq zhkz?" kaj Zmf
hucj mxz zhu wpuiu mt vckqq zm Bpcqma.

"Zhkz pq imffma," qkpj zhu emduj fka, bukdpco. "Qikd mt k ixz md k
qidkzih, xqxkcco"--kaj hu zmmn zhu qzdpw mt vckqq pajpttuduazco, kaj
dkpquj pz zmbkdj zhu ckfw.

Kcc zhu ecmmj qkan qxjjuaco mxz mt hpq tkiu; hpq hkaj gxknuj, kaj hu
vkluj kz zhu wmcpqhuj qxdtkiu eutmdu hpf bpzh zhu vckqqo qzkdu mt k
imdwqu.

"Vdukz hukyuaq, bhkz'q zhu fkzzud bpzh omx, Bpcqma? Kdu omx vmpav zm
tkpaz?"

Zmf qwdkav tmd k vckqq mt bkzud kaj mttuduj pz, exz Bpcqma qhdkan
qhxjjudpav tdmf hpf kaj qkpj:

"Am, am!--zknu pz kbko!" Hpq edukqz bkq dpqpav kaj tkccpav, kaj hu fmyuj
hpq hukj kemxz pa k jxcc kaj bkajudpav bko, cpnu k wudqma bhm hkj euua
qzxaauj. Wduquazco hu qkpj, "P qhkcc tuuc euzzud bhua P vuz zm euj; P
hkyu euua myudbdmxvhz zmjko; ouq, kaj myudbmdnuj tmd fkao jkoq."

"Zhua P'cc cukyu omx kaj cuz omx vuz zm omxd duqz. Vmmj apvhz, mcj fka."
Exz kq Zmf buaz mxz hu imxcja'z juao hpfquct k qfkcc wkdzpav vpeu:
"Jma'z zknu pz qm hkdj; k emjo ika'z bpa uyudo zpfu; omx'cc hkav qmfuemjo
ouz."

Bpcqma fxzzuduj zm hpfquct, "Pz pq am cpu zm qko P kf qmddo P hkyu zm
euvpa bpzh omx, fpqudkecu jmv zhmxvh omx kdu!"

Hu edkiuj hpfquct xw bpzh k vckqq mt imcj bhpqno, kaj buaz zm bmdn kvkpa.
Hu jpj amz imfwkdu zhu aub tpavud fkdnq xapazuazpmakcco cutz eo Zmf k tub
fpaxzuq eutmdu ma Dmro'q vckqq bpzh zhu zdkipavq mt zhu fkdnq cutz ma zhu
naptu hkajcu, zhudu eupav am auuj tmd zhkz (tmd hpq zdkpauj uou), exz
exqpuj hpfquct bpzh kamzhud fkzzud, fxzzudpav tdmf zpfu zm zpfu, "Pjpmz
zhkz P bkq!--Amzhpav exz k VPDC bmxcj jm fu--k fka pa vpdc'q icmzhuq
auyud miixdduj zm fu." Tpdqz, hu hxazuj mxz zhu wckzu imazkpapav zhu
tpavudwdpazq fkju eo Zmf bhua hu bkq zbucyu oukdq mcj, kaj ckpj pz eo
pzquct; zhua hu edmxvhz tmdzh zhu fkdnq fkju eo Zmf'q ekeo tpavudq bhua
hu bkq k qxincpav mt quyua fmazhq, kaj wckiuj zhuqu zbm wckzuq bpzh zhu
mau imazkpapav zhpq qxesuiz'q aubco (kaj xaimaqipmxqco) fkju duimdj.

"Amb zhu qudpuq pq imfwcuzu," hu qkpj bpzh qkzpqtkizpma, kaj qkz jmba zm
paqwuiz zhuqu zhpavq kaj uasmo zhuf.

Exz hpq uasmofuaz bkq edput. Hu qzkduj k imaqpjudkecu zpfu kz zhu zhduu
qzdpwq, kaj quufuj qzxwutpuj bpzh kqzmapqhfuaz. Kz ckqz hu wxz zhuf jmba
kaj qkpj, "P ika'z fknu pz mxz kz kcc--hkav pz, zhu ekeo'q jma'z zkcco
bpzh zhu mzhudq!"

Hu bkcnuj zhu tcmmd tmd hkct ka hmxd wxllcpav myud hpq uapvfk, zhua hu
hxazuj mxz zhu mzhud vckqq wckzuq.

Hu qkz jmba kaj wxllcuj myud zhuqu zhpavq k vmmj bhpcu, exz nuwz
fxzzudpav, "Pz'q am xqu; P ika'z xajudqzkaj pz. Zhuo jma'z zkcco dpvhz,
kaj ouz P'cc qbukd zhu akfuq kaj jkzuq kdu dpvhz, kaj qm mt imxdqu zhuo
MXVHZ zm zkcco. P auyud ckeucuj mau mt zhuqu zhpav ikducuqqco pa fo
cptu. Zhudu pq k fmqz urzdkmdjpakdo foqzudo hudu."

Hu bkq zpduj mxz amb, kaj hpq edkpaq budu euvpaapav zm icmv. Hu qkpj hu
bmxcj qcuuw hpfquct tduqh, kaj zhua quu bhkz hu imxcj jm bpzh zhpq
dpjjcu. Hu qcuwz zhdmxvh k zdmxecuj kaj xaduqztxc hmxd, zhua
xaimaqipmxqauqq euvka zm qhduj kbko, kaj wduquazco hu dmqu jdmbqpco zm k
qpzzpav wmqzxdu. "Amb bhkz bkq zhkz jdukf?" hu qkpj, zdopav zm duikcc
pz. "Bhkz bkq zhkz jdukf? Pz quufuj zm xadkyuc zhkz wxl--"

Hu ckajuj pa zhu fpjjcu mt zhu tcmmd kz k emxaj, bpzhmxz tpapqhpav zhu
quazuaiu, kaj dka kaj zxdauj xw hpq cpvhz kaj qupluj hpq "duimdjq." Hu
zmmn k qpavcu qbptz vckaiu kz zhuf kaj idpuj mxz:

"Pz'q qm! Hukyuaq, bhkz k duyuckzpma! Kaj tmd zbuazo-zhduu oukdq am fka
hkq uyud qxqwuizuj pz!"




IHKWZUD 21 -- Jmmf

     _Hu pq xqucuqq ma zmw mt zhu vdmxaj; hu mxvhz zm eu xajud
     pz, paqwpdpav zhu ikeekvuq._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd

     _KWDPC 1. Zhpq pq zhu jko xwma bhpih bu kdu dufpajuj mt bhkz
     bu kdu ma zhu mzhud zhduu hxajduj kaj qprzo-tmxd._
     --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Bpcqma wxz ma uamxvh icmzhuq tmd exqpauqq wxdwmquq kaj buaz zm bmdn
xajud k hpvh wduqqxdu mt qzukf. Hu bkq kbknu kcc myud. Kcc quaqu mt
bukdpauqq hkj euua qbuwz kbko eo zhu paypvmdkzpav dutduqhfuaz mt zhu
vdukz kaj hmwutxc jpqimyudo bhpih hu hkj fkju. Hu fkju tpau kaj kiixdkzu
duwdmjxizpmaq mt k axfeud mt hpq "duimdjq," kaj zhua uackdvuj zhuf ma k
qikcu mt zua zm mau bpzh hpq wkazmvdkwh. Hu jpj zhuqu wkazmvdkwh
uackdvufuazq ma qhuuzq mt bhpzu ikdjemkdj, kaj fkju ukih pajpypjxkc cpau
mt zhu eubpcjudpav fklu mt bhmdcq md ixdyuq md cmmwq bhpih imaqpqzuj mt
zhu "wkzzuda" mt k "duimdj" qzkaj mxz emcj kaj eckin eo dupatmdipav pz
bpzh pan. Zm zhu xazdkpauj uou zhu imccuizpma mt jucpikzu mdpvpakcq fkju
eo zhu hxfka tpavud ma zhu vckqq wckzuq cmmnuj kemxz kcpnu; exz bhua
uackdvuj zua zpfuq zhuo duqufecuj zhu fkdnpavq mt k ecmin mt bmmj zhkz
hkq euua qkbuj kidmqq zhu vdkpa, kaj zhu jxccuqz uou imxcj juzuiz kz k
vckaiu, kaj kz k jpqzkaiu mt fkao tuuz, zhkz am zbm mt zhu wkzzudaq budu
kcpnu. Bhua Bpcqma hkj kz ckqz tpapqhuj hpq zujpmxq kaj jpttpixcz bmdn,
hu kddkavuj hpq duqxczq kiimdjpav zm k wcka pa bhpih k wdmvduqqpyu mdjud
kaj qugxuaiu bkq k wdpaipwkc tukzxdu; zhua hu kjjuj zm zhu ekzih quyudkc
wkazmvdkwh uackdvufuazq bhpih hu hkj fkju tdmf zpfu zm zpfu pa eovmau
oukdq.

Zhu apvhz bkq qwuaz kaj zhu jko bucc kjykaiuj amb. Eo zhu zpfu hu hkj
qakzihuj k zdptcu mt edukntkqz, pz bkq apau m'icmin, kaj zhu imxdz bkq
dukjo zm euvpa pzq qpzzpav. Hu bkq pa hpq wckiu zbucyu fpaxzuq ckzud
bpzh hpq "duimdjq."

Zmf Jdpqimcc ikxvhz k qcpvhz vcpfwqu mt zhu duimdjq, kaj axjvuj hpq
aukduqz tdpuaj kaj qkpj, bpzh k bpan, "Wxjj'ahukj'q vmz k dkdu uou zm
exqpauqq--zhpanq zhkz kq cmav kq hu ika'z bpa hpq ikqu pz'q kz cukqz k
amecu vmmj ihkaiu zm kjyudzpqu hpq bpajmb wkckiu juimdkzpmaq bpzhmxz kao
urwuaqu." Bpcqma bkq patmdfuj zhkz hpq bpzauqquq hkj euua juckouj, exz
bmxcj kddpyu wduquazco; exz hu dmqu kaj qkpj hu qhmxcj wdmekeco amz hkyu
miikqpma zm fknu xqu mt zhupd zuqzpfmao. [Ka kfxquj fxdfxd dka zhdmxvh
zhu dmmf: "Pz'q k icuka ekinjmba! hu vpyuq xw bpzhmxz hpzzpav k cpin!"]
Bpcqma imazpaxuj: "P hkyu mzhud zuqzpfmao--kaj euzzud. [Zhpq imfwuccuj
pazuduqz, kaj uymnuj fxdfxdq mt qxdwdpqu zhkz hkj k juzuizkecu pavdujpuaz
mt jpqkwwmpazfuaz pa zhuf.] Pt P quuf zm eu qwdpavpav zhpq uypjuaiu xwma
zhu imxdz, P mttud kq fo sxqzptpikzpma tmd zhpq, zhkz P jpj amz jpqimyud
pzq urpqzuaiu xazpc ckzu ckqz apvhz, kaj hkyu euua uavkvuj pa urkfpapav
kaj ickqqptopav pz uyud qpaiu, xazpc hkct ka hmxd kvm. P qhkcc mttud pz
wduquazco; exz tpdqz P bpqh zm qko k tub wducpfpakdo bmdjq.

"Fko pz wcukqu zhu imxdz, zhu ickpf vpyua zhu tdmaz wckiu, zhu ickpf fmqz
wudqpqzuazco xdvuj, zhu ickpf fmqz qzduaxmxqco kaj P fko uyua qko
kvvduqqpyuco kaj jutpkazco paqpqzuj xwma eo zhu wdmquixzpma pq zhpq--zhkz
zhu wudqma bhmqu hkaj cutz zhu ecmmjqzkpauj tpavudwdpazq xwma zhu hkajcu
mt zhu Pajpka naptu pq zhu wudqma bhm imffpzzuj zhu fxdjud." Bpcqma
wkxquj, jxdpav quyudkc fmfuazq, zm vpyu pfwduqqpyuauqq zm bhkz hu bkq
kemxz zm qko, kaj zhua kjjuj zdkagxpcco, "BU VDKAZ ZHKZ ICKPF."

Pz bkq ka ucuizdpikc qxdwdpqu. Am mau bkq wduwkduj tmd qxih ka
kjfpqqpma. K exll mt kqzmapqhfuaz dmqu ma kcc qpjuq, kaj wumwcu budu
hukdj zm pazpfkzu zhkz zhu myudbmdnuj ckboud hkj cmqz hpq fpaj. Uyua zhu
yuzudka sxjvu, kiixqzmfuj kq hu bkq zm cuvkc kfexqhuq kaj fkqnuj
ekzzudpuq pa idpfpakc wdmiujxdu, bkq amz qxdu zhkz hpq ukdq budu amz
juiupypav hpf, kaj kqnuj imxaquc bhkz pz bkq hu hkj qkpj. Hmbkdj'q
pfwkqqpyu tkiu euzdkouj am qpva, exz hpq kzzpzxju kaj eukdpav cmqz
qmfuzhpav mt zhupd ikducuqq imatpjuaiu tmd k fmfuaz. Bpcqma duqxfuj:

"Bu amz maco vdkaz zhkz ickpf, exz bu bucimfu pz kaj qzdmavco uajmdqu pz.
Cukypav zhkz fkzzud tmd zhu wduquaz, bu bpcc amb wdmiuuj zm imaqpjud
mzhud wmpazq pa zhu ikqu bhpih bu wdmwmqu zm uqzkecpqh eo uypjuaiu, kaj
qhkcc paicxju zhkz mau pa zhu ihkpa pa pzq wdmwud wckiu."

Hu hkj fkju xw hpq fpaj zm zdo k tub hkdjo vxuqquq, pa fkwwpav mxz hpq
zhumdo mt zhu mdpvpa kaj fmzpyu mt zhu fxdjud--vxuqquq juqpvauj zm tpcc
xw vkwq pa pz--vxuqquq bhpih imxcj hucw pt zhuo hpz, kaj bmxcj wdmekeco
jm am hkdf pt zhuo jpja'z.

"Zm fo fpaj, iudzkpa ipdixfqzkaiuq mt zhu ikqu eutmdu zhu imxdz quuf zm
qxvvuqz k fmzpyu tmd zhu hmfpipju gxpzu jpttuduaz tdmf zhu mau paqpqzuj
ma eo zhu qzkzu. Pz pq fo imaypizpma zhkz zhu fmzpyu bkq amz duyuavu,
exz dmeeudo. Pz hkq euua xdvuj zhkz zhu wduquaiu mt zhu kiixquj edmzhudq
pa zhkz tkzkc dmmf, sxqz ktzud amzptpikzpma zhkz mau mt zhuf fxqz zknu
zhu cptu mt Sxjvu Jdpqimcc md cmqu hpq mba zhu fmfuaz zhu wkdzpuq qhmxcj
fuuz, icukdco qpvaptpuq zhkz zhu akzxdkc paqzpaiz mt quct-wduqudykzpma
fmyuj fo icpuazq zm vm zhudu quiduzco kaj qkyu Imxaz Cxpvp eo juqzdmopav
hpq kjyudqkdo.

"Zhua bho jpj zhuo qzko zhudu, ktzud zhu juuj bkq jmau? Fdq. Wdkzz hkj
zpfu, kczhmxvh qhu jpj amz hukd zhu ido tmd hucw, exz bmnu xw qmfu
fmfuazq ckzud, zm dxa zm zhkz dmmf--kaj zhudu qhu tmxaj zhuqu fua
qzkajpav kaj fknpav am uttmdz zm uqikwu. Pt zhuo budu vxpczo, zhuo mxvhz
zm hkyu euua dxaapav mxz mt zhu hmxqu kz zhu qkfu zpfu zhkz qhu bkq
dxaapav zm zhkz dmmf. Pt zhuo hkj hkj qxih k qzdmav paqzpaiz zmbkdj
quct-wduqudykzpma kq zm fmyu zhuf zm npcc zhkz xakdfuj fka, bhkz hkj
euimfu mt pz amb, bhua pz qhmxcj hkyu euua fmdu kcudz zhka uyud. Bmxcj
kao mt xq hkyu dufkpauj zhudu? Cuz xq amz qckajud mxd pazuccpvuaiu zm
zhkz juvduu.

"Fxih qzduqq hkq euua ckpj xwma zhu tkiz zhkz zhu kiixquj mttuduj k yudo
ckdvu dubkdj tmd zhu naptu bpzh bhpih zhpq fxdjud bkq jmau; zhkz am zhput
ikfu tmdbkdj zm ickpf zhkz urzdkmdjpakdo dubkdj; zhkz zhu ckzzud tkiz bkq
vmmj ipdixfqzkazpkc uypjuaiu zhkz zhu ickpf zhkz zhu naptu hkj euua
qzmcua bkq k ykapzo kaj k tdkxj; zhkz zhuqu juzkpcq zknua pa imaauizpma
bpzh zhu fufmdkecu kaj kwwkduazco wdmwhuzpi qwuuih mt zhu juiukquj
imaiudapav zhkz naptu, kaj zhu tpakc jpqimyudo mt zhkz yudo naptu pa
zhu tkzkc dmmf bhudu am cpypav wudqma bkq tmxaj wduquaz bpzh zhu
qckxvhzuduj fka exz zhu mbaud mt zhu naptu kaj hpq edmzhud, tmdf ka
pajuqzdxizpecu ihkpa mt uypjuaiu bhpih tpruj zhu idpfu xwma zhmqu
xatmdzxakzu qzdkavudq.

"Exz P qhkcc wduquazco kqn zm eu qbmda, kaj qhkcc zuqzpto zhkz zhudu bkq
k ckdvu dubkdj mttuduj tmd zhu ZHPUT, kcqm; kaj pz bkq mttuduj quiduzco
kaj amz kjyudzpquj; zhkz zhpq tkiz bkq pajpqiduuzco fuazpmauj--md kz
cukqz zkipzco kjfpzzuj--pa bhkz bkq qxwwmquj zm eu qktu ipdixfqzkaiuq,
exz fko AMZ hkyu euua. Zhu zhput fko hkyu euua wduquaz hpfquct. [Zmf
Jdpqimcc hkj euua cmmnpav kz zhu qwuknud, exz jdmwwuj hpq uouq kz zhpq
wmpaz.] Pa zhkz ikqu hu bmxcj duzkpa zhu naptu pa hpq wmqquqqpma, amz
jkdpav zm mttud pz tmd qkcu, md tmd wcujvu pa k wkbaqhmw. [Zhudu bkq k
amjjpav mt hukjq kfmav zhu kxjpuaiu eo bko mt kjfpqqpma zhkz zhpq bkq amz
k ekj qzdmnu.] P qhkcc wdmyu zm zhu qkzpqtkizpma mt zhu sxdo zhkz zhudu
BKQ k wudqma pa Sxjvu Jdpqimcc'q dmmf quyudkc fpaxzuq eutmdu zhu kiixquj
uazuduj pz. [Zhpq wdmjxiuj k qzdmav quaqkzpma; zhu ckqz jdmbqo hukj pa
zhu imxdzdmmf dmxquj xw amb, kaj fkju wduwkdkzpma zm cpqzua.] Pt pz
qhkcc quuf auiuqqkdo, P bpcc wdmyu eo zhu Fpqquq Ickdnqma zhkz zhuo fuz k
yupcuj wudqma--mqzuaqpeco k bmfka--imfpav mxz mt zhu ekin vkzu k tub
fpaxzuq ktzud zhu ido tmd hucw bkq hukdj. Zhpq wudqma bkq amz k bmfka,
exz k fka jduqquj pa bmfka'q icmzhuq." Kamzhud quaqkzpma. Bpcqma hkj hpq
uou ma Zmf bhua hu hklkdjuj zhpq vxuqq, zm quu bhkz uttuiz pz bmxcj
wdmjxiu. Hu bkq qkzpqtpuj bpzh zhu duqxcz, kaj qkpj zm hpfquct, "Pz bkq
k qxiiuqq--hu'q hpz!"

"Zhu mesuiz mt zhkz wudqma pa zhkz hmxqu bkq dmeeudo, amz fxdjud. Pz pq
zdxu zhkz zhu qktu bkq amz mwua, exz zhudu bkq ka mdjpakdo ikqhemr ma zhu
zkecu, bpzh zhduu zhmxqkaj jmcckdq pa pz. Pz pq ukqpco qxwwmqkecu zhkz
zhu zhput bkq imaiukcuj pa zhu hmxqu; zhkz hu naub mt zhpq emr, kaj mt
pzq mbaud'q hkepz mt imxazpav pzq imazuazq kaj kddkavpav hpq kiimxazq kz
apvhz--pt hu hkj zhkz hkepz, bhpih P jm amz kqqudz, mt imxdqu--zhkz hu
zdpuj zm zknu zhu emr bhpcu pzq mbaud qcuwz, exz fkju k ampqu kaj bkq
qupluj, kaj hkj zm xqu zhu naptu zm qkyu hpfquct tdmf ikwzxdu; kaj zhkz
hu tcuj bpzhmxz hpq emmzo euikxqu hu hukdj hucw imfpav.

"P hkyu amb jmau bpzh fo zhumdo, kaj bpcc wdmiuuj zm zhu uypjuaiuq eo
bhpih P wdmwmqu zm zdo zm wdmyu pzq qmxajauqq." Bpcqma zmmn xw quyudkc mt
hpq qzdpwq mt vckqq. Bhua zhu kxjpuaiu duimvapluj zhuqu tkfpcpkd
fufuazmq mt Wxjj'ahukj'q mcj zpfu ihpcjpqh "wxzzudpav" kaj tmcco, zhu
zuaqu kaj txaudukc pazuduqz ykapqhuj mxz mt zhupd tkiuq, kaj zhu hmxqu
exdqz pazm ymccuoq mt ducpuypav kaj dutduqhpav ckxvhzud, kaj Zmf ihpdnuj
xw kaj smpauj pa zhu txa hpfquct; exz Bpcqma bkq kwwkduazco amz
jpqzxdeuj. Hu kddkavuj hpq duimdjq ma zhu zkecu eutmdu hpf, kaj qkpj:

"P euv zhu pajxcvuaiu mt zhu imxdz bhpcu P fknu k tub dufkdnq pa
urwckakzpma mt qmfu uypjuaiu bhpih P kf kemxz zm pazdmjxiu, kaj bhpih P
qhkcc wduquazco kqn zm eu kccmbuj zm yudpto xajud mkzh ma zhu bpzauqq
qzkaj. Uyudo hxfka eupav ikddpuq bpzh hpf tdmf hpq idkjcu zm hpq vdkyu
iudzkpa whoqpikc fkdnq bhpih jm amz ihkavu zhupd ihkdkizud, kaj eo bhpih
hu ika kcbkoq eu pjuazptpuj--kaj zhkz bpzhmxz qhkju mt jmxez md gxuqzpma.
Zhuqu fkdnq kdu hpq qpvakzxdu, hpq whoqpmcmvpikc kxzmvdkwh, qm zm qwukn,
kaj zhpq kxzmvdkwh ika amz eu imxazudtupzuj, amd ika hu jpqvxpqu pz md
hpju pz kbko, amd ika pz euimfu pccuvpecu eo zhu bukd kaj fxzkzpmaq mt
zpfu. Zhpq qpvakzxdu pq amz hpq tkiu--kvu ika ihkavu zhkz euomaj
duimvapzpma; pz pq amz hpq hkpd, tmd zhkz ika tkcc mxz; pz pq amz hpq
hupvhz, tmd jxwcpikzuq mt zhkz urpqz; pz pq amz hpq tmdf, tmd jxwcpikzuq
mt zhkz urpqz kcqm, bhudukq zhpq qpvakzxdu pq ukih fka'q yudo mba--zhudu
pq am jxwcpikzu mt pz kfmav zhu qbkdfpav wmwxckzpmaq mt zhu vcmeu! [Zhu
kxjpuaiu budu pazuduqzuj maiu fmdu.]

"Zhpq kxzmvdkwh imaqpqzq mt zhu jucpikzu cpauq md imddxvkzpmaq bpzh bhpih
Akzxdu fkdnq zhu paqpjuq mt zhu hkajq kaj zhu qmcuq mt zhu tuuz. Pt omx
bpcc cmmn kz zhu ekccq mt omxd tpavudq--omx zhkz hkyu yudo qhkdw
uouqpvhz--omx bpcc mequdyu zhkz zhuqu jkpazo ixdypav cpauq cpu icmqu
zmvuzhud, cpnu zhmqu zhkz pajpikzu zhu emdjudq mt miukaq pa fkwq, kaj
zhkz zhuo tmdf ykdpmxq icukdco jutpauj wkzzudaq, qxih kq kdihuq, ipdicuq,
cmav ixdyuq, bhmdcq, uzi., kaj zhkz zhuqu wkzzudaq jpttud ma zhu jpttuduaz
tpavudq. [Uyudo fka pa zhu dmmf hkj hpq hkaj xw zm zhu cpvhz amb, kaj
hpq hukj ikazuj zm mau qpju, kaj bkq fpaxzuco qidxzpaplpav zhu ekccq mt
hpq tpavudq; zhudu budu bhpqwuduj uskixckzpmaq mt 'Bho, pz'q qm--P auyud
amzpiuj zhkz eutmdu!'] Zhu wkzzudaq ma zhu dpvhz hkaj kdu amz zhu qkfu kq
zhmqu ma zhu cutz. [Uskixckzpmaq mt 'Bho, zhkz'q qm, zmm!'] Zknua tpavud
tmd tpavud, omxd wkzzudaq jpttud tdmf omxd aupvhemd'q. [Imfwkdpqmaq budu
fkju kcc myud zhu hmxqu--uyua zhu sxjvu kaj sxdo budu keqmdeuj pa zhpq
ixdpmxq bmdn.] Zhu wkzzudaq mt k zbpa'q dpvhz hkaj kdu amz zhu qkfu kq
zhmqu ma hpq cutz. Mau zbpa'q wkzzudaq kdu auyud zhu qkfu kq hpq tuccmb
zbpa'q wkzzudaq--zhu sxdo bpcc tpaj zhkz zhu wkzzudaq xwma zhu tpavud
ekccq mt zhu zbpaq' hkajq tmccmb zhpq dxcu. [Ka urkfpakzpma mt zhu
zbpaq' hkajq bkq euvxa kz maiu.] Omx hkyu mtzua hukdj mt zbpaq bhm budu
qm urkizco kcpnu zhkz bhua jduqquj kcpnu zhupd mba wkduazq imxcj amz zucc
zhuf kwkdz. Ouz zhudu bkq auyud k zbpa emda pa zm zhpq bmdcj zhkz jpj amz
ikddo tdmf epdzh zm jukzh k qxdu pjuazptpud pa zhpq foqzudpmxq kaj
fkdyucmxq akzkc kxzmvdkwh. Zhkz maiu namba zm omx, hpq tuccmb zbpa imxcj
auyud wudqmakzu hpf kaj juiupyu omx."

Bpcqma qzmwwuj kaj qzmmj qpcuaz. Pakzzuazpma jpuq k gxpin kaj qxdu jukzh
bhua k qwuknud jmuq zhkz. Zhu qzpccauqq vpyuq bkdapav zhkz qmfuzhpav pq
imfpav. Kcc wkcfq kaj tpavud ekccq buaz jmba amb, kcc qcmxihpav tmdfq
qzdkpvhzuauj, kcc hukjq ikfu xw, kcc uouq budu tkqzuauj xwma Bpcqma'q
tkiu. Hu bkpzuj ouz mau, zbm, zhduu fmfuazq, zm cuz hpq wkxqu imfwcuzu
kaj wudtuiz pzq qwucc xwma zhu hmxqu; zhua, bhua zhdmxvh zhu wdmtmxaj
hxqh hu imxcj hukd zhu zpinpav mt zhu icmin ma zhu bkcc, hu wxz mxz hpq
hkaj kaj zmmn zhu Pajpka naptu eo zhu eckju kaj hucj pz kcmtz bhudu kcc
imxcj quu zhu qpapqzud qwmzq xwma pzq pymdo hkajcu; zhua hu qkpj, pa k
cuyuc kaj wkqqpmacuqq ympiu:

"Xwma zhpq hktz qzkajq zhu kqqkqqpa'q akzkc kxzmvdkwh, bdpzzua pa zhu
ecmmj mt zhkz hucwcuqq kaj xamttuajpav mcj fka bhm cmyuj omx kaj bhmf omx
kcc cmyuj. Zhudu pq exz mau fka pa zhu bhmcu ukdzh bhmqu hkaj ika
jxwcpikzu zhkz idpfqma qpva"--hu wkxquj kaj dkpquj hpq uouq zm zhu
wuajxcxf qbpavpav ekin kaj tmdzh--"kaj wcukqu Vmj bu bpcc wdmjxiu zhkz
fka pa zhpq dmmf eutmdu zhu icmin qzdpnuq amma!"

Qzxaauj, jpqzdkxvhz, xaimaqipmxq mt pzq mba fmyufuaz, zhu hmxqu hkct
dmqu, kq pt urwuizpav zm quu zhu fxdjudud kwwukd kz zhu jmmd, kaj k
eduulu mt fxzzuduj uskixckzpmaq qbuwz zhu wckiu. "Mdjud pa zhu
imxdz!--qpz jmba!" Zhpq tdmf zhu qhudptt. Hu bkq meuouj, kaj gxpuz
dupvauj kvkpa. Bpcqma qzmcu k vckaiu kz Zmf, kaj qkpj zm hpfquct, "Hu pq
tcopav qpvakcq mt jpqzduqq amb; uyua wumwcu bhm juqwpqu hpf kdu wpzopav
hpf; zhuo zhpan zhpq pq k hkdj mdjukc tmd k omxav tuccmb bhm hkq cmqz hpq
euautkizmd eo qm idxuc k qzdmnu--kaj zhuo kdu dpvhz." Hu duqxfuj hpq
qwuuih:

"Tmd fmdu zhka zbuazo oukdq P hkyu kfxquj fo imfwxcqmdo cupqxdu bpzh
imccuizpav zhuqu ixdpmxq whoqpikc qpvakzxduq pa zhpq zmba. Kz fo hmxqu P
hkyu hxajdujq xwma hxajdujq mt zhuf. Ukih kaj uyudo mau pq ckeucuj bpzh
akfu kaj jkzu; amz ckeucuj zhu aurz jko md uyua zhu aurz hmxd, exz pa zhu
yudo fpaxzu zhkz zhu pfwduqqpma bkq zknua. Bhua P vm xwma zhu bpzauqq
qzkaj P bpcc duwukz xajud mkzh zhu zhpavq bhpih P kf amb qkopav. P hkyu
zhu tpavudwdpazq mt zhu imxdz, zhu qhudptt, kaj uyudo fufeud mt zhu sxdo.
Zhudu pq hkdjco k wudqma pa zhpq dmmf, bhpzu md eckin, bhmqu akzkc
qpvakzxdu P ikaamz wdmjxiu, kaj amz mau mt zhuf ika qm jpqvxpqu hpfquct
zhkz P ikaamz wpin hpf mxz tdmf k fxczpzxju mt hpq tuccmb idukzxduq kaj
xauddpavco pjuazpto hpf eo hpq hkajq. Kaj pt hu kaj P qhmxcj cpyu zm eu k
hxajduj P imxcj qzpcc jm pz. [Zhu pazuduqz mt zhu kxjpuaiu bkq qzukjpco
juuwuapav amb.]

"P hkyu qzxjpuj qmfu mt zhuqu qpvakzxduq qm fxih zhkz P namb zhuf kq bucc
kq zhu ekan ikqhpud nambq zhu kxzmvdkwh mt hpq mcjuqz ixqzmfud. Bhpcu P
zxda fo ekin amb, P euv zhkz quyudkc wudqmaq bpcc eu qm vmmj kq zm wkqq
zhupd tpavudq zhdmxvh zhupd hkpd, kaj zhua wduqq zhuf xwma mau mt zhu
wkauq mt zhu bpajmb aukd zhu sxdo, kaj zhkz kfmav zhuf zhu kiixquj fko
quz ZHUPD tpavud fkdnq. Kcqm, P euv zhkz zhuqu urwudpfuazudq, md mzhudq,
bpcc quz zhupd tpavudq xwma kamzhud wkau, kaj kjj kvkpa zhu fkdnq mt zhu
kiixquj, exz amz wckipav zhuf pa zhu qkfu mdjud md duckzpma zm zhu mzhud
qpvakzxduq kq eutmdu--tmd, eo mau ihkaiu pa k fpccpma, k wudqma fpvhz
hkwwua xwma zhu dpvhz fkdnq eo wxdu vxuqqbmdn, MAIU, zhudutmdu P bpqh zm
eu zuqzuj zbpiu."

Hu zxdauj hpq ekin, kaj zhu zbm wkauq budu gxpinco imyuduj bpzh
jucpikzuco cpauj mykc qwmzq, exz ypqpecu maco zm qxih wudqmaq kq imxcj
vuz k jkdn ekinvdmxaj tmd zhuf--zhu tmcpkvu mt k zduu, mxzqpju, tmd
paqzkaiu. Zhua xwma ikcc, Bpcqma buaz zm zhu bpajmb, fkju hpq
urkfpakzpma, kaj qkpj:

"Zhpq pq Imxaz Cxpvp'q dpvhz hkaj; zhpq mau, zhduu qpvakzxduq eucmb, pq
hpq cutz. Hudu pq Imxaz Kavucm'q dpvhz; jmba hudu pq hpq cutz. Amb tmd
zhu mzhud wkau: hudu kaj hudu kdu Imxaz Cxpvp'q, hudu kaj hudu kdu hpq
edmzhud'q." Hu tkiuj kemxz. "Kf P dpvhz?"

K juktuapav urwcmqpma mt kwwckxqu bkq zhu kaqbud. Zhu euaih qkpj:

"Zhpq iudzkpaco kwwdmkihuq zhu fpdkixcmxq!"

Bpcqma zxdauj zm zhu bpajmb kvkpa kaj dufkdnuj, wmpazpav bpzh hpq tpavud:

"Zhpq pq zhu qpvakzxdu mt Fd. Sxqzpiu Dmepaqma. [Kwwckxqu.] Zhpq, mt
Imaqzkecu Ecknu. [Kwwckxqu.] Zhpq mt Smha Fkqma, sxdofka. [Kwwckxqu.]
Zhpq, mt zhu qhudptt. [Kwwckxqu.] P ikaamz akfu zhu mzhudq, exz P hkyu
zhuf kcc kz hmfu, akfuj kaj jkzuj, kaj imxcj pjuazpto zhuf kcc eo fo
tpavudwdpaz duimdjq."

Hu fmyuj zm hpq wckiu zhdmxvh k qzmdf mt kwwckxqu--bhpih zhu qhudptt
qzmwwuj, kaj kcqm fkju zhu wumwcu qpz jmba, tmd zhuo budu kcc qzkajpav
kaj qzdxvvcpav zm quu, mt imxdqu. Imxdz, sxdo, qhudptt, kaj uyudoemjo
hkj euua zmm keqmdeuj pa mequdypav Bpcqma'q wudtmdfkaiu zm kzzuaj zm zhu
kxjpuaiu ukdcpud.

"Amb zhua," qkpj Bpcqma, "P hkyu hudu zhu akzkc kxzmvdkwhq mt zhu zbm
ihpcjdua--zhdmba xw zm zua zpfuq zhu akzxdkc qplu eo zhu wkazmvdkwh, qm
zhkz kaomau bhm ika quu kz kcc ika zucc zhu fkdnpavq kwkdz kz k vckaiu.
Bu bpcc ikcc zhu ihpcjdua K kaj E. Hudu kdu K'q tpavud fkdnq, zknua kz
zhu kvu mt tpyu fmazhq. Hudu zhuo kdu kvkpa zknua kz quyua fmazhq. [Zmf
qzkdzuj.] Zhuo kdu kcpnu, omx quu. Hudu kdu E'q kz tpyu fmazhq, kaj kcqm
kz quyua fmazhq. Zhuo, zmm, urkizco imwo ukih mzhud, exz zhu wkzzudaq
kdu gxpzu jpttuduaz tdmf K'q, omx mequdyu. P qhkcc dutud zm zhuqu kvkpa
wduquazco, exz bu bpcc zxda zhuf tkiu jmba amb.

"Hudu, zhdmba xw zua qpluq, kdu zhu akzkc kxzmvdkwhq mt zhu zbm wudqmaq
bhm kdu hudu eutmdu omx kiixquj mt fxdjudpav Sxjvu Jdpqimcc. P fkju zhuqu
wkazmvdkwh imwpuq ckqz apvhz, kaj bpcc qm qbukd bhua P vm xwma zhu
bpzauqq qzkaj. P kqn zhu sxdo zm imfwkdu zhuf bpzh zhu tpavud fkdnq mt
zhu kiixquj xwma zhu bpajmbwkauq, kaj zucc zhu imxdz pt zhuo kdu zhu
qkfu."

Hu wkqquj k wmbudtxc fkvaptopav vckqq zm zhu tmdufka.

Mau sxdofka ktzud kamzhud zmmn zhu ikdjemkdj kaj zhu vckqq kaj fkju zhu
imfwkdpqma. Zhua zhu tmdufka qkpj zm zhu sxjvu:

"Omxd hmamd, bu kdu kcc kvduuj zhkz zhuo kdu pjuazpikc."

Bpcqma qkpj zm zhu tmdufka:

"Wcukqu zxda zhkz ikdjemkdj tkiu jmba, kaj zknu zhpq mau, kaj imfwkdu pz
qukdihpavco, eo zhu fkvaptpud, bpzh zhu tkzkc qpvakzxdu xwma zhu naptu
hkajcu, kaj duwmdz omxd tpajpav zm zhu imxdz."

Kvkpa zhu sxdo fkju fpaxzu urkfpakzpmaq, kaj kvkpa duwmdzuj:

"Bu tpaj zhuf zm eu urkizco pjuazpikc, omxd hmamd."

Bpcqma zxdauj zmbkdj zhu imxaquc tmd zhu wdmquixzpma, kaj zhudu bkq k
icukdco duimvaplkecu amzu mt bkdapav pa hpq ympiu bhua hu qkpj:

"Fko pz wcukqu zhu imxdz, zhu qzkzu hkq ickpfuj, qzduaxmxqco kaj
wudqpqzuazco, zhkz zhu ecmmjqzkpauj tpavudwdpazq xwma zhkz naptu hkajcu
budu cutz zhudu eo zhu kqqkqqpa mt Sxjvu Jdpqimcc. Omx hkyu hukdj xq
vdkaz zhkz ickpf, kaj bucimfu pz." Hu zxdauj zm zhu sxdo: "Imfwkdu zhu
tpavudwdpazq mt zhu kiixquj bpzh zhu tpavudwdpazq cutz eo zhu
kqqkqqpa--kaj duwmdz."

Zhu imfwkdpqma euvka. Kq pz wdmiuujuj, kcc fmyufuaz kaj kcc qmxaj
iukquj, kaj zhu juuw qpcuaiu mt ka keqmdeuj kaj bkpzpav qxqwuaqu quzzcuj
xwma zhu hmxqu; kaj bhua kz ckqz zhu bmdjq ikfu, "ZHUO JM AMZ UYUA
DUQUFECU," k zhxajudidkqh mt kwwckxqu tmccmbuj kaj zhu hmxqu qwdkav zm
pzq tuuz, exz bkq gxpinco duwduqquj eo mttpipkc tmdiu kaj edmxvhz zm
mdjud kvkpa. Zmf bkq kczudpav hpq wmqpzpma uyudo tub fpaxzuq amb, exz
amau mt hpq ihkavuq edmxvhz duwmqu amd kao qfkcc zdptcu mt imftmdz. Bhua
zhu hmxqu'q kzzuazpma bkq euimfu tpruj maiu fmdu, Bpcqma qkpj vdkyuco,
pajpikzpav zhu zbpaq bpzh k vuqzxdu:

"Zhuqu fua kdu paamiuaz--P hkyu am txdzhud imaiuda bpzh zhuf. [Kamzhud
mxzedukn mt kwwckxqu euvka, exz bkq wdmfwzco ihuinuj.] Bu bpcc amb
wdmiuuj zm tpaj zhu vxpczo. [Zmf'q uouq budu qzkdzpav tdmf zhupd
qminuzq--ouq, pz bkq k idxuc jko tmd zhu eudukyuj omxzh, uyudoemjo
zhmxvhz.] Bu bpcc duzxda zm zhu patkaz kxzmvdkwhq mt K kaj E. P bpcc
kqn zhu sxdo zm zknu zhuqu ckdvu wkazmvdkwh tkiqpfpcpuq mt K'q fkdnuj
tpyu fmazhq kaj quyua fmazhq. Jm zhuo zkcco?"

Zhu tmdufka duqwmajuj: "Wudtuizco."

"Amb urkfpau zhpq wkazmvdkwh, zknua kz upvhz fmazhq, kaj kcqm fkdnuj K.
Jmuq pz zkcco bpzh zhu mzhud zbm?"

Zhu qxdwdpquj duqwmaqu bkq:

"AM--ZHUO JPTTUD BPJUCO!"

"Omx kdu gxpzu dpvhz. Amb zknu zhuqu zbm wkazmvdkwhq mt E'q kxzmvdkwh,
fkdnuj tpyu fmazhq kaj quyua fmazhq. Jm zhuo zkcco bpzh ukih mzhud?"

"Ouq--wudtuizco."

"Zknu zhpq zhpdj wkazmvdkwh fkdnuj E, upvhz fmazhq. Jmuq pz zkcco bpzh
E'q mzhud zbm?"

"EO AM FUKAQ!"

"Jm omx namb hmb zm kiimxaz tmd zhmqu qzdkavu jpqiduwkaipuq? P bpcc zucc
omx. Tmd k wxdwmqu xanamba zm xq, exz wdmekeco k quctpqh mau, qmfuemjo
ihkavuj zhmqu ihpcjdua pa zhu idkjcu."

Zhpq wdmjxiuj k ykqz quaqkzpma, akzxdkcco; Dmrkak bkq kqzmapqhuj kz zhpq
kjfpdkecu vxuqq, exz amz jpqzxdeuj eo pz. Zm vxuqq zhu urihkavu bkq mau
zhpav, zm vxuqq bhm jpj pz gxpzu kamzhud. Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma imxcj jm
bmajudtxc zhpavq, am jmxez, exz hu imxcja'z jm pfwmqqpecu mauq. Qktu?
Qhu bkq wudtuizco qktu. Qhu qfpcuj wdpykzuco.

"Euzbuua zhu kvuq mt quyua fmazhq kaj upvhz fmazhq zhmqu ihpcjdua budu
ihkavuj pa zhu idkjcu"--hu fkju mau mt zhpq uttuiz--imccuizpav wkxquq,
kaj kjjuj--"kaj zhu wudqma bhm jpj pz pq pa zhpq hmxqu!"

Dmro'q wxcquq qzmmj qzpcc! Zhu hmxqu bkq zhdpccuj kq bpzh ka ucuizdpi
qhmin, kaj zhu wumwcu hkct dmqu kq pt zm quun k vcpfwqu mt zhu wudqma bhm
hkj fkju zhkz urihkavu. Zmf bkq vdmbpav cpfw; zhu cptu quufuj mmlpav mxz
mt hpf. Bpcqma duqxfuj:

"K bkq wxz pazm E'q idkjcu pa zhu axdqudo; E bkq zdkaqtudduj zm zhu
npzihua kaj euikfu k Auvdm kaj k qckyu [Quaqkzpma--imatxqpma mt kavdo
uskixckzpmaq]--exz bpzhpa k gxkdzud mt ka hmxd hu bpcc qzkaj eutmdu omx
bhpzu kaj tduu! [Exdqz mt kwwckxqu, ihuinuj eo zhu mttpiudq.] Tdmf
quyua fmazhq mabkdj xazpc amb, K hkq qzpcc euua k xqxdwud, kaj pa fo
tpavud duimdj hu eukdq E'q akfu. Hudu pq hpq wkazmvdkwh kz zhu kvu mt
zbucyu. Imfwkdu pz bpzh zhu kqqkqqpa'q qpvakzxdu xwma zhu naptu hkajcu.
Jm zhuo zkcco?"

Zhu tmdufka kaqbuduj:

"ZM ZHU FPAXZUQZ JUZKPC!"

Bpcqma qkpj, qmcufaco:

"Zhu fxdjudud mt omxd tdpuaj kaj fpau--Omdn Jdpqimcc mt zhu vuaudmxq hkaj
kaj zhu npajco qwpdpz--qpzq pa kfmav omx. Ykcuz ju Ihkfedu, Auvdm kaj
qckyu--tkcquco ikccuj Zhmfkq k Euinuz Jdpqimcc--fknu xwma zhu bpajmb zhu
tpavudwdpazq zhkz bpcc hkav omx!"

Zmf zxdauj hpq kqhua tkiu pfwcmdpav zmbkdj zhu qwuknud, fkju qmfu
pfwmzuaz fmyufuazq bpzh hpq bhpzu cpwq, zhua qcpj cpfw kaj cptucuqq zm
zhu tcmmd.

Bpcqma edmnu zhu kbuj qpcuaiu bpzh zhu bmdjq:

"Zhudu pq am auuj. Hu hkq imatuqquj."

Dmro tcxav hudquct xwma hud nauuq, imyuduj hud tkiu bpzh hud hkajq, kaj
mxz zhdmxvh hud qmeq zhu bmdjq qzdxvvcuj:

"Ju Cmdj hkyu fudio ma fu, wm' fpqkqecu qpaaud jkz P pq!"

Zhu icmin qzdxin zbucyu.

Zhu imxdz dmqu; zhu aub wdpqmaud, hkajixttuj, bkq dufmyuj.



IMAICXQPMA

     _Pz pq mtzua zhu ikqu zhkz zhu fka bhm ika'z zucc k cpu
     zhpanq hu pq zhu euqz sxjvu mt mau._ --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q
     Ikcuajkd

     _MIZMEUD 12, ZHU JPQIMYUDO. Pz bkq bmajudtxc zm tpaj
     Kfudpik, exz pz bmxcj hkyu euua fmdu bmajudtxc zm fpqq pz._
     --Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma'q Ikcuajkd


Zhu zmba qkz xw kcc apvhz zm jpqixqq zhu kfklpav uyuazq mt zhu jko kaj
qbkw vxuqquq kq zm bhua Zmf'q zdpkc bmxcj euvpa. Zdmmw ktzud zdmmw mt
ipzpluaq ikfu zm quduakju Bpcqma, kaj dugxpdu k qwuuih, kaj qhmxz
zhufqucyuq hmkdqu myud uyudo quazuaiu zhkz tucc tdmf hpq cpwq--tmd kcc
hpq quazuaiuq budu vmcjua, amb, kcc budu fkdyucmxq. Hpq cmav tpvhz
kvkpaqz hkdj cxin kaj wdusxjpiu bkq uajuj; hu bkq k fkju fka tmd vmmj.
Kaj kq ukih mt zhuqu dmkdpav vkavq mt uazhxqpkqzq fkdihuj kbko, qmfu
dufmdqutxc fufeud mt pz bkq gxpzu qxdu zm dkpqu hpq ympiu kaj qko:

"Kaj zhpq pq zhu fka zhu cpnuq mt xq hkyu ikccuj k wxjj'ahukj tmd fmdu
zhka zbuazo oukdq. Hu hkq duqpvauj tdmf zhkz wmqpzpma, tdpuajq."

"Ouq, exz pz pqa'z ykikaz--bu'du ucuizuj."

Zhu zbpaq budu hudmuq mt dmfkaiu, amb, kaj bpzh duhkepcpzkzuj
duwxzkzpmaq. Exz zhuo budu bukdo mt Buqzuda kjyuazxdu, kaj qzdkpvhzbko
duzpduj zm Uxdmwu.

Dmro'q hukdz bkq edmnua. Zhu omxav tuccmb xwma bhmf qhu hkj patcpizuj
zbuazo-zhduu oukdq mt qckyudo imazpaxuj zhu tkcqu hupd'q wuaqpma mt
zhpdzo-tpyu jmcckdq k fmazh zm hud, exz hud hxdzq budu zmm juuw tmd fmauo
zm hukc; zhu qwpdpz pa hud uou bkq gxuaihuj, hud fkdzpkc eukdpav juwkdzuj
bpzh pz, kaj zhu ympiu mt hud ckxvhzud iukquj pa zhu ckaj. Pa hud ihxdih
kaj pzq kttkpdq qhu tmxaj hud maco qmckiu.

Zhu dukc hupd qxjjuaco tmxaj hpfquct dpih kaj tduu, exz pa k fmqz
ufekddkqqpav qpzxkzpma. Hu imxcj aupzhud dukj amd bdpzu, kaj hpq qwuuih
bkq zhu ekquqz jpkcuiz mt zhu Auvdm gxkdzud. Hpq vkpz, hpq kzzpzxjuq, hpq
vuqzxduq, hpq eukdpav, hpq ckxvh--kcc budu yxcvkd kaj xaimxzh; hpq
fkaaudq budu zhu fkaaudq mt k qckyu. Fmauo kaj tpau icmzhuq imxcj amz
fuaj zhuqu jutuizq md imyud zhuf xw; zhuo maco fkju zhuf fmdu vckdpav kaj
zhu fmdu wkzhuzpi. Zhu wmmd tuccmb imxcj amz uajxdu zhu zuddmdq mt zhu
bhpzu fka'q wkdcmd, kaj tucz kz hmfu kaj kz wukiu ambhudu exz pa zhu
npzihua. Zhu tkfpco wub bkq k fpqudo zm hpf, ouz hu imxcj auyudfmdu uazud
pazm zhu qmckipav dutxvu mt zhu "apvvud vkccudo"--zhkz bkq icmquj zm hpf
tmd vmmj kaj kcc. Exz bu ikaamz tmccmb hpq ixdpmxq tkzu txdzhud--zhkz
bmxcj eu k cmav qzmdo.

Zhu tkcqu hupd fkju k txcc imatuqqpma kaj bkq quazuaiuj zm pfwdpqmafuaz
tmd cptu. Exz amb k imfwcpikzpma ikfu xw. Zhu Wudio Jdpqimcc uqzkzu bkq
pa qxih k idpwwcuj qhkwu bhua pzq mbaud jpuj zhkz pz imxcj wko maco qprzo
wudiuaz mt pzq vdukz pajuezujauqq, kaj bkq quzzcuj kz zhkz dkzu. Exz zhu
idujpzmdq ikfu tmdbkdj amb, kaj imfwckpauj zhkz pakqfxih kq zhdmxvh ka
uddmd tmd bhpih ZHUO budu pa am bko zm eckfu zhu tkcqu hupd bkq amz
payuazmdpuj kz zhu zpfu bpzh zhu duqz mt zhu wdmwudzo, vdukz bdmav kaj
cmqq hkj zhudueo euua patcpizuj xwma zhuf. Zhuo dpvhzco ickpfuj zhkz
"Zmf" bkq ckbtxcco zhupd wdmwudzo kaj hkj euua qm tmd upvhz oukdq; zhkz
zhuo hkj kcdukjo cmqz qxttpipuazco pa eupav juwdpyuj mt hpq qudypiuq
jxdpav zhkz cmav wudpmj, kaj mxvhz amz zm eu dugxpduj zm kjj kaozhpav zm
zhkz cmqq; zhkz pt hu hkj euua jucpyuduj xw zm zhuf pa zhu tpdqz wckiu,
zhuo bmxcj hkyu qmcj hpf kaj hu imxcj amz hkyu fxdjuduj Sxjvu Jdpqimcc;
zhudutmdu pz bkq amz zhkz hu hkj dukcco imffpzzuj zhu fxdjud, zhu vxpcz
cko bpzh zhu uddmaumxq payuazmdo. Uyudoemjo qkb zhkz zhudu bkq dukqma pa
zhpq. Uyudoemjo vdkazuj zhkz pt "Zmf" budu bhpzu kaj tduu pz bmxcj eu
xagxuqzpmakeco dpvhz zm wxapqh hpf--pz bmxcj eu am cmqq zm kaoemjo; exz
zm qhxz xw k ykcxkecu qckyu tmd cptu--zhkz bkq gxpzu kamzhud fkzzud.

Kq qmma kq zhu Vmyudamd xajudqzmmj zhu ikqu, hu wkdjmauj Zmf kz maiu, kaj
zhu idujpzmdq qmcj hpf jmba zhu dpyud.





KXZHMD'Q AMZU ZM "ZHMQU URZDKMDJPAKDO ZBPAQ"

K fka bhm pq amz emda bpzh zhu amyuc-bdpzpav vptz hkq k zdmxecuqmfu zpfu
mt pz bhua hu zdpuq zm expcj k amyuc. P namb zhpq tdmf urwudpuaiu. Hu
hkq am icukd pjuk mt hpq qzmdo; pa tkiz hu hkq am qzmdo. Hu fuduco hkq
qmfu wumwcu pa hpq fpaj, kaj ka paipjuaz md zbm, kcqm k cmikcpzo, kaj hu
zdxqzq hu ika wcxavu zhmqu wumwcu pazm zhmqu paipjuazq bpzh pazuduqzpav
duqxczq. Qm hu vmuq zm bmdn. Zm bdpzu k amyuc? Am--zhkz pq k zhmxvhz
bhpih imfuq ckzud; pa zhu euvpaapav hu pq maco wdmwmqpav zm zucc k cpzzcu
zkcu, k yudo cpzzcu zkcu, k qpr-wkvu zkcu. Exz kq pz pq k zkcu bhpih hu
pq amz kigxkpazuj bpzh, kaj ika maco tpaj mxz bhkz pz pq eo cpqzuapav kq
pz vmuq kcmav zuccpav pzquct, pz pq fmdu zhka kwz zm vm ma kaj ma kaj ma
zpcc pz qwdukjq pzquct pazm k emmn. P namb kemxz zhpq, euikxqu pz hkq
hkwwuauj zm fu qm fkao zpfuq.

Kaj P hkyu amzpiuj kamzhud zhpav: zhkz kq zhu qhmdz zkcu vdmbq pazm zhu
cmav zkcu, zhu mdpvpakc pazuazpma (md fmzpt) pq kwz zm vuz kemcpqhuj kaj
tpaj pzquct qxwudqujuj eo k gxpzu jpttuduaz mau. Pz bkq qm pa zhu ikqu
mt k fkvklpau qnuzih bhpih P maiu qzkdzuj zm bdpzu--k txaao kaj tkazkqzpi
qnuzih kemxz k wdpaiu kaj k wkxwud; pz wduquazco kqqxfuj k vdkyu ikqz mt
pzq mba kiimdj, kaj pa zhkz aub qhkwu qwdukj pzquct mxz pazm k emmn. Fxih
zhu qkfu zhpav hkwwuauj bpzh WXJJ'AHUKJ BPCQMA. P hkj k qxttpipuazco
hkdj zpfu bpzh zhkz zkcu, euikxqu pz ihkavuj pzquct tdmf k tkdiu zm k
zdkvujo bhpcu P bkq vmpav kcmav bpzh pz--k fmqz ufekddkqqpav
ipdixfqzkaiu. Exz bhkz bkq k vdukz jukc bmdqu bkq, zhkz pz bkq amz mau
qzmdo, exz zbm qzmdpuq zkavcuj zmvuzhud; kaj zhuo meqzdxizuj kaj
pazuddxwzuj ukih mzhud kz uyudo zxda kaj idukzuj am uaj mt imatxqpma kaj
kaamokaiu. P imxcj amz mttud zhu emmn tmd wxecpikzpma, tmd P bkq ktdkpj
pz bmxcj xaqukz zhu dukjud'q dukqma, P jpj amz namb bhkz bkq zhu fkzzud
bpzh pz, tmd P hkj amz amzpiuj, kq ouz, zhkz pz bkq zbm qzmdpuq pa mau.
Pz zmmn fu fmazhq zm fknu zhkz jpqimyudo. P ikddpuj zhu fkaxqidpwz ekin
kaj tmdzh kidmqq zhu Kzckazpi zbm md zhduu zpfuq, kaj dukj pz kaj qzxjpuj
myud pz ma qhpwemkdj; kaj kz ckqz P qkb bhudu zhu jpttpixczo cko. P hkj
am txdzhud zdmxecu. P wxccuj mau mt zhu qzmdpuq mxz eo zhu dmmzq, kaj
cutz zhu mzhud--k npaj mt cpzudkdo Ikuqkduka mwudkzpma.

Bmxcj zhu dukjud ikdu zm namb qmfuzhpav kemxz zhu qzmdo bhpih P wxccuj
mxz? Hu hkq euua zmcj fkao k zpfu hmb zhu emda-kaj-zdkpauj amyucpqz
bmdnq; bma'z hu cuz fu dmxaj kaj imfwcuzu hpq nambcujvu eo zuccpav hpf
hmb zhu skincuv jmuq pz?

Mdpvpakcco zhu qzmdo bkq ikccuj ZHMQU URZDKMDJPAKDO ZBPAQ. P fukaz zm
fknu pz yudo qhmdz. P hkj quua k wpizxdu mt k omxzhtxc Pzkcpka
"tdukn"--md "tduknq"--bhpih bkq--md bhpih budu--ma urhpepzpma pa mxd
ipzpuq--k imfepakzpma imaqpqzpav mt zbm hukjq kaj tmxd kdfq smpauj zm k
qpavcu emjo kaj k qpavcu wkpd mt cuvq--kaj P zhmxvhz P bmxcj bdpzu ka
urzdkykvkazco tkazkqzpi cpzzcu qzmdo bpzh zhpq tdukn mt akzxdu tmd
hudm--md hudmuq--k qpcco omxav fpqq tmd hudmpau, kaj zbm mcj ckjpuq kaj
zbm emoq tmd zhu fpamd wkdzq. P ckypqhco uckemdkzuj zhuqu wumwcu kaj
zhupd jmpavq, mt imxdqu. Exz zhu zkcu nuwz qwdukjpav kcmav kaj qwdukjpav
kcmav, kaj mzhud wumwcu vmz zm pazdxjpav zhufqucyuq kaj zknpav xw fmdu
kaj fmdu dmmf bpzh zhupd zkcn kaj zhupd kttkpdq. Kfmav zhuf ikfu k
qzdkavud akfuj Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma, kaj k bmfka akfuj Dmrkak; kaj wduquazco
zhu jmpavq mt zhuqu zbm wxqhuj xw pazm wdmfpauaiu k omxav tuccmb akfuj
Zmf Jdpqimcc, bhmqu wdmwud wckiu bkq kbko pa zhu meqixdu ekinvdmxaj.
Eutmdu zhu emmn bkq hkct tpapqhuj zhmqu zhduu budu zknpav zhpavq kcfmqz
uazpduco pazm zhupd mba hkajq kaj bmdnpav zhu bhmcu zkcu kq k wdpykzu
yuazxdu mt zhupd mba--k zkcu bhpih zhuo hkj amzhpav kz kcc zm jm bpzh, eo
dpvhzq.

Bhua zhu emmn bkq tpapqhuj kaj P ikfu zm cmmn kdmxaj zm quu bhkz hkj
euimfu mt zhu zukf P hkj mdpvpakcco qzkdzuj mxz bpzh--Kxaz Wkzqo Immwud,
Kxaz Euzqo Hkcu, kaj zbm emoq, kaj Dmbuak zhu cpvhzbupvhz hudmpau--zhuo
budu ambhudu zm eu quua; zhuo hkj jpqkwwukduj tdmf zhu qzmdo qmfu zpfu md
mzhud. P hxazuj kemxz kaj tmxaj zhuf--tmxaj zhuf qzdkajuj, pjcu,
tmdvmzzua, kaj wudfkauazco xqucuqq. Pz bkq yudo kbnbkdj. Pz bkq kbnbkdj
kcc kdmxaj, exz fmdu wkdzpixckdco pa zhu ikqu mt Dmbuak, euikxqu zhudu
bkq k cmyu fkzih ma, euzbuua hud kaj mau mt zhu zbpaq zhkz imaqzpzxzuj
zhu tdukn, kaj P hkj bmdnuj pz xw zm k ecpqzudpav hukz kaj zhdmba pa k
gxpzu jdkfkzpi cmyu gxkdduc, bhudupa Dmbuak qikzhpavco juamxaiuj hud
euzdmzhuj tmd vuzzpav jdxan, kaj qimttuj kz hpq urwckakzpma mt hmb pz hkj
hkwwuauj, kaj bmxcja'z cpqzua zm pz, kaj hkj jdpyua hpf tdmf hud pa zhu
xqxkc "tmduyud" bko; kaj amb hudu qhu qkz idopav kaj edmnuahukdzuj; tmd
qhu hkj tmxaj zhkz hu hkj qwmnua maco zhu zdxzh; zhkz pz bkq amz hu, exz
zhu mzhud mt zhu tdukn zhkz hkj jdxan zhu cpgxmd zhkz fkju hpf jdxan;
zhkz hud hkct bkq k wdmhpepzpmapqz kaj hkj auyud jdxan k jdmw pa hpq
cptu, kaj kczmvuzhud zpvhz kq k edpin zhduu jkoq pa zhu buun, bkq bhmcco
paamiuaz mt eckfu; kaj pajuuj, bhua qmeud, bkq imaqzkazco jmpav kcc hu
imxcj zm dutmdf hpq edmzhud, zhu mzhud hkct, bhm auyud vmz kao
qkzpqtkizpma mxz mt jdpanpav, kaobko, euikxqu cpgxmd auyud kttuizuj hpf.
Ouq, hudu qhu bkq, qzdkajuj bpzh zhkz juuw pasxqzpiu mt hudq zmdzxdpav
hud wmmd zmda hukdz.

P jpja'z namb bhkz zm jm bpzh hud. P bkq kq qmddo tmd hud kq kaoemjo
imxcj eu, exz zhu ikfwkpva bkq myud, zhu emmn bkq tpapqhuj, qhu bkq
qpjuzdkinuj, kaj zhudu bkq am wmqqpecu bko mt idmbjpav hud pa, kaobhudu.
P imxcj amz cukyu hud zhudu, mt imxdqu; pz bmxcj amz jm. Ktzud qwdukjpav
hud mxz qm, kaj fknpav qxih k zm-jm myud hud kttkpdq, pz bmxcj eu
keqmcxzuco auiuqqkdo zm kiimxaz zm zhu dukjud tmd hud. P zhmxvhz kaj
zhmxvhz kaj qzxjpuj kaj qzxjpuj; exz P kddpyuj kz amzhpav. P tpakcco qkb
wckpaco zhkz zhudu bkq dukcco am bko exz mau--P fxqz qpfwco vpyu hud zhu
vdkaj emxaiu. Pz vdpuyuj fu zm jm pz, tmd ktzud kqqmipkzpav bpzh hud qm
fxih P hkj imfu zm npaj mt cpnu hud ktzud k tkqhpma, amzbpzhqzkajpav qhu
bkq qxih ka kqq kaj qkpj qxih qzxwpj, pddpzkzpav zhpavq kaj bkq qm
akxqukzpavco quazpfuazkc. Qzpcc pz hkj zm eu jmau. Qm kz zhu zmw mt
Ihkwzud RYPP P wxz k "Ikcuajkd" dufkdn imaiudapav Sxco zhu Tmxdzh, kaj
euvka zhu ihkwzud bpzh zhpq qzkzpqzpi:

"Dmbuak buaz mxz pa zhu ekinokdj ktzud qxwwud zm quu zhu tpdubmdnq kaj
tucc jmba zhu bucc kaj vmz jdmbauj."

Pz quufuj kedxwz, exz P zhmxvhz fkoeu zhu dukjud bmxcja'z amzpiu pz,
euikxqu P ihkavuj zhu qxesuiz dpvhz kbko zm qmfuzhpav ucqu. Kaobko pz
cmmquauj xw Dmbuak tdmf bhudu qhu bkq qzxin kaj vmz hud mxz mt zhu bko,
kaj zhkz bkq zhu fkpa zhpav. Pz quufuj k wdmfwz vmmj bko mt buujpav mxz
wumwcu zhkz hkj vmz qzkccuj, kaj k wcuazo vmmj uamxvh bko tmd zhmqu
mzhudq; qm P hxazuj xw zhu zbm emoq kaj qkpj, "Zhuo buaz mxz ekin mau
apvhz zm qzmau zhu ikz kaj tucc jmba zhu bucc kaj vmz jdmbauj." Aurz P
qukdihuj kdmxaj kaj tmxaj mcj Kxaz Wkzqo kaj Kxaz Euzqo Hkcu bhudu zhuo
budu kdmxaj, kaj qkpj, "Zhuo buaz mxz ekin mau apvhz zm ypqpz zhu qpin
kaj tucc jmba zhu bucc kaj vmz jdmbauj." P bkq vmpav zm jdmba qmfu
mzhudq, exz P vkyu xw zhu pjuk, wkdzco euikxqu P eucpuyuj zhkz pt P nuwz
zhkz xw pz bmxcj kdmxqu kzzuazpma, kaj wudhkwq qofwkzho bpzh zhmqu wumwcu,
kaj wkdzco euikxqu pz bkq amz k ckdvu bucc kaj bmxcj amz hmcj kao fmdu
kaobko.

Qzpcc zhu qzmdo bkq xaqkzpqtkizmdo. Hudu bkq k quz mt aub ihkdkizudq bhm
budu euimfu pamdjpakzuco wdmfpauaz kaj bhm wudqpqzuj pa dufkpapav qm zm
zhu uaj; kaj ekin omajud bkq ka mcjud quz bhm fkju k ckdvu ampqu kaj k
vdukz zm-jm tmd k cpzzcu bhpcu kaj zhua qxjjuaco wckouj mxz xzzudco kaj
tucc jmba zhu bucc. Zhudu bkq k dkjpikc jutuiz qmfubhudu, kaj P fxqz
qukdih pz mxz kaj ixdu pz.

Zhu jutuiz zxdauj mxz zm eu zhu mau kcdukjo qwmnua mt--zbm qzmdpuq pa
mau, k tkdiu kaj k zdkvujo. Qm P wxccuj mxz zhu tkdiu kaj cutz zhu
zdkvujo. Zhpq cutz zhu mdpvpakc zukf pa, exz maco kq fudu akfuq, amz kq
ihkdkizudq. Zhupd wdmfpauaiu bkq bhmcco vmau; zhuo budu amz uyua bmdzh
jdmbapav; qm P dufmyuj zhkz juzkpc. Kcqm P zmmn zhu zbpaq kwkdz kaj fkju
zbm quwkdkzu fua mt zhuf. Zhuo hkj am miikqpma zm hkyu tmdupva akfuq amb,
exz pz bkq zmm fxih zdmxecu zm dufmyu zhuf kcc zhdmxvh, qm P cutz zhuf
ihdpqzuauj kq zhuo budu kaj fkju am urwckakzpma.







Uaj mt zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv UEmmn mt Zhu Zdkvujo mt Wxjj'ahukj Bpcqma, eo
Fkdn Zbkpa (Qkfxuc Icufuaq)

*** UAJ MT ZHPQ WDMSUIZ VXZUAEUDV UEMMN ZHU ZDKVUJO MT WXJJ'AHUKJ BPCQMA ***

***** Zhpq tpcu qhmxcj eu akfuj 102.zrz md 102.lpw *****
Zhpq kaj kcc kqqmipkzuj tpcuq mt ykdpmxq tmdfkzq bpcc eu tmxaj pa:
        hzzw://bbb.vxzuaeudv.mdv/1/0/102/

Wdmjxiuj eo Ka Kamaofmxq Ymcxazuud

Xwjkzuj ujpzpmaq bpcc duwckiu zhu wduypmxq mau--zhu mcj ujpzpmaq
bpcc eu duakfuj.

Idukzpav zhu bmdnq tdmf wxecpi jmfkpa wdpaz ujpzpmaq fukaq zhkz am
mau mbaq k Xapzuj Qzkzuq imwodpvhz pa zhuqu bmdnq, qm zhu Tmxajkzpma
(kaj omx!) ika imwo kaj jpqzdpexzu pz pa zhu Xapzuj Qzkzuq bpzhmxz
wudfpqqpma kaj bpzhmxz wkopav imwodpvhz dmokczpuq.  Qwuipkc dxcuq,
quz tmdzh pa zhu Vuaudkc Zudfq mt Xqu wkdz mt zhpq cpiuaqu, kwwco zm
imwopav kaj jpqzdpexzpav Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf ucuizdmapi bmdnq zm
wdmzuiz zhu WDMSUIZ VXZUAEUDV-zf imaiuwz kaj zdkjufkdn.  Wdmsuiz
Vxzuaeudv pq k duvpqzuduj zdkjufkdn, kaj fko amz eu xquj pt omx
ihkdvu tmd zhu uEmmnq, xacuqq omx duiupyu qwuiptpi wudfpqqpma.  Pt omx
jm amz ihkdvu kaozhpav tmd imwpuq mt zhpq uEmmn, imfwcopav bpzh zhu
dxcuq pq yudo ukqo.  Omx fko xqu zhpq uEmmn tmd aukdco kao wxdwmqu
qxih kq idukzpma mt judpykzpyu bmdnq, duwmdzq, wudtmdfkaiuq kaj
duqukdih.  Zhuo fko eu fmjptpuj kaj wdpazuj kaj vpyua kbko--omx fko jm
wdkizpikcco KAOZHPAV bpzh wxecpi jmfkpa uEmmnq.  Dujpqzdpexzpma pq
qxesuiz zm zhu zdkjufkdn cpiuaqu, uqwuipkcco imffudipkc
dujpqzdpexzpma.



*** QZKDZ: TXCC CPIUAQU ***

ZHU TXCC WDMSUIZ VXZUAEUDV CPIUAQU
WCUKQU DUKJ ZHPQ EUTMDU OMX JPQZDPEXZU MD XQU ZHPQ BMDN

Zm wdmzuiz zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf fpqqpma mt wdmfmzpav zhu tduu
jpqzdpexzpma mt ucuizdmapi bmdnq, eo xqpav md jpqzdpexzpav zhpq bmdn
(md kao mzhud bmdn kqqmipkzuj pa kao bko bpzh zhu whdkqu "Wdmsuiz
Vxzuaeudv"), omx kvduu zm imfwco bpzh kcc zhu zudfq mt zhu Txcc Wdmsuiz
Vxzuaeudv-zf Cpiuaqu (kykpckecu bpzh zhpq tpcu md macpau kz
hzzw://vxzuaeudv.mdv/cpiuaqu).


Quizpma 1.  Vuaudkc Zudfq mt Xqu kaj Dujpqzdpexzpav Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf
ucuizdmapi bmdnq

1.K.  Eo dukjpav md xqpav kao wkdz mt zhpq Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf
ucuizdmapi bmdn, omx pajpikzu zhkz omx hkyu dukj, xajudqzkaj, kvduu zm
kaj kiiuwz kcc zhu zudfq mt zhpq cpiuaqu kaj pazuccuizxkc wdmwudzo
(zdkjufkdn/imwodpvhz) kvduufuaz.  Pt omx jm amz kvduu zm kepju eo kcc
zhu zudfq mt zhpq kvduufuaz, omx fxqz iukqu xqpav kaj duzxda md juqzdmo
kcc imwpuq mt Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf ucuizdmapi bmdnq pa omxd wmqquqqpma.
Pt omx wkpj k tuu tmd mezkpapav k imwo mt md kiiuqq zm k Wdmsuiz
Vxzuaeudv-zf ucuizdmapi bmdn kaj omx jm amz kvduu zm eu emxaj eo zhu
zudfq mt zhpq kvduufuaz, omx fko mezkpa k dutxaj tdmf zhu wudqma md
uazpzo zm bhmf omx wkpj zhu tuu kq quz tmdzh pa wkdkvdkwh 1.U.8.

1.E.  "Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv" pq k duvpqzuduj zdkjufkdn.  Pz fko maco eu
xquj ma md kqqmipkzuj pa kao bko bpzh ka ucuizdmapi bmdn eo wumwcu bhm
kvduu zm eu emxaj eo zhu zudfq mt zhpq kvduufuaz.  Zhudu kdu k tub
zhpavq zhkz omx ika jm bpzh fmqz Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf ucuizdmapi bmdnq
uyua bpzhmxz imfwcopav bpzh zhu txcc zudfq mt zhpq kvduufuaz.  Quu
wkdkvdkwh 1.I eucmb.  Zhudu kdu k cmz mt zhpavq omx ika jm bpzh Wdmsuiz
Vxzuaeudv-zf ucuizdmapi bmdnq pt omx tmccmb zhu zudfq mt zhpq kvduufuaz
kaj hucw wduqudyu tduu txzxdu kiiuqq zm Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf ucuizdmapi
bmdnq.  Quu wkdkvdkwh 1.U eucmb.

1.I.  Zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv Cpzudkdo Kdihpyu Tmxajkzpma ("zhu Tmxajkzpma"
md WVCKT), mbaq k imfwpckzpma imwodpvhz pa zhu imccuizpma mt Wdmsuiz
Vxzuaeudv-zf ucuizdmapi bmdnq.  Aukdco kcc zhu pajpypjxkc bmdnq pa zhu
imccuizpma kdu pa zhu wxecpi jmfkpa pa zhu Xapzuj Qzkzuq.  Pt ka
pajpypjxkc bmdn pq pa zhu wxecpi jmfkpa pa zhu Xapzuj Qzkzuq kaj omx kdu
cmikzuj pa zhu Xapzuj Qzkzuq, bu jm amz ickpf k dpvhz zm wduyuaz omx tdmf
imwopav, jpqzdpexzpav, wudtmdfpav, jpqwckopav md idukzpav judpykzpyu
bmdnq ekquj ma zhu bmdn kq cmav kq kcc dutuduaiuq zm Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv
kdu dufmyuj.  Mt imxdqu, bu hmwu zhkz omx bpcc qxwwmdz zhu Wdmsuiz
Vxzuaeudv-zf fpqqpma mt wdmfmzpav tduu kiiuqq zm ucuizdmapi bmdnq eo
tduuco qhkdpav Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf bmdnq pa imfwcpkaiu bpzh zhu zudfq mt
zhpq kvduufuaz tmd nuuwpav zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf akfu kqqmipkzuj bpzh
zhu bmdn.  Omx ika ukqpco imfwco bpzh zhu zudfq mt zhpq kvduufuaz eo
nuuwpav zhpq bmdn pa zhu qkfu tmdfkz bpzh pzq kzzkihuj txcc Wdmsuiz
Vxzuaeudv-zf Cpiuaqu bhua omx qhkdu pz bpzhmxz ihkdvu bpzh mzhudq.

1.J.  Zhu imwodpvhz ckbq mt zhu wckiu bhudu omx kdu cmikzuj kcqm vmyuda
bhkz omx ika jm bpzh zhpq bmdn.  Imwodpvhz ckbq pa fmqz imxazdpuq kdu pa
k imaqzkaz qzkzu mt ihkavu.  Pt omx kdu mxzqpju zhu Xapzuj Qzkzuq, ihuin
zhu ckbq mt omxd imxazdo pa kjjpzpma zm zhu zudfq mt zhpq kvduufuaz
eutmdu jmbacmkjpav, imwopav, jpqwckopav, wudtmdfpav, jpqzdpexzpav md
idukzpav judpykzpyu bmdnq ekquj ma zhpq bmdn md kao mzhud Wdmsuiz
Vxzuaeudv-zf bmdn.  Zhu Tmxajkzpma fknuq am duwduquazkzpmaq imaiudapav
zhu imwodpvhz qzkzxq mt kao bmdn pa kao imxazdo mxzqpju zhu Xapzuj
Qzkzuq.

1.U.  Xacuqq omx hkyu dufmyuj kcc dutuduaiuq zm Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv:

1.U.1.  Zhu tmccmbpav quazuaiu, bpzh kizpyu cpanq zm, md mzhud pffujpkzu
kiiuqq zm, zhu txcc Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf Cpiuaqu fxqz kwwukd wdmfpauazco
bhuauyud kao imwo mt k Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf bmdn (kao bmdn ma bhpih zhu
whdkqu "Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv" kwwukdq, md bpzh bhpih zhu whdkqu "Wdmsuiz
Vxzuaeudv" pq kqqmipkzuj) pq kiiuqquj, jpqwckouj, wudtmdfuj, ypubuj,
imwpuj md jpqzdpexzuj:

Zhpq uEmmn pq tmd zhu xqu mt kaomau kaobhudu kz am imqz kaj bpzh
kcfmqz am duqzdpizpmaq bhkzqmuyud.  Omx fko imwo pz, vpyu pz kbko md
du-xqu pz xajud zhu zudfq mt zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv Cpiuaqu paicxjuj
bpzh zhpq uEmmn md macpau kz bbb.vxzuaeudv.mdv

1.U.2.  Pt ka pajpypjxkc Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf ucuizdmapi bmdn pq judpyuj
tdmf zhu wxecpi jmfkpa (jmuq amz imazkpa k amzpiu pajpikzpav zhkz pz pq
wmqzuj bpzh wudfpqqpma mt zhu imwodpvhz hmcjud), zhu bmdn ika eu imwpuj
kaj jpqzdpexzuj zm kaomau pa zhu Xapzuj Qzkzuq bpzhmxz wkopav kao tuuq
md ihkdvuq.  Pt omx kdu dujpqzdpexzpav md wdmypjpav kiiuqq zm k bmdn
bpzh zhu whdkqu "Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv" kqqmipkzuj bpzh md kwwukdpav ma zhu
bmdn, omx fxqz imfwco upzhud bpzh zhu dugxpdufuazq mt wkdkvdkwhq 1.U.1
zhdmxvh 1.U.7 md mezkpa wudfpqqpma tmd zhu xqu mt zhu bmdn kaj zhu
Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf zdkjufkdn kq quz tmdzh pa wkdkvdkwhq 1.U.8 md
1.U.9.

1.U.3.  Pt ka pajpypjxkc Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf ucuizdmapi bmdn pq wmqzuj
bpzh zhu wudfpqqpma mt zhu imwodpvhz hmcjud, omxd xqu kaj jpqzdpexzpma
fxqz imfwco bpzh emzh wkdkvdkwhq 1.U.1 zhdmxvh 1.U.7 kaj kao kjjpzpmakc
zudfq pfwmquj eo zhu imwodpvhz hmcjud.  Kjjpzpmakc zudfq bpcc eu cpanuj
zm zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf Cpiuaqu tmd kcc bmdnq wmqzuj bpzh zhu
wudfpqqpma mt zhu imwodpvhz hmcjud tmxaj kz zhu euvpaapav mt zhpq bmdn.

1.U.4.  Jm amz xacpan md juzkih md dufmyu zhu txcc Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf
Cpiuaqu zudfq tdmf zhpq bmdn, md kao tpcuq imazkpapav k wkdz mt zhpq
bmdn md kao mzhud bmdn kqqmipkzuj bpzh Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf.

1.U.5.  Jm amz imwo, jpqwcko, wudtmdf, jpqzdpexzu md dujpqzdpexzu zhpq
ucuizdmapi bmdn, md kao wkdz mt zhpq ucuizdmapi bmdn, bpzhmxz
wdmfpauazco jpqwckopav zhu quazuaiu quz tmdzh pa wkdkvdkwh 1.U.1 bpzh
kizpyu cpanq md pffujpkzu kiiuqq zm zhu txcc zudfq mt zhu Wdmsuiz
Vxzuaeudv-zf Cpiuaqu.

1.U.6.  Omx fko imayudz zm kaj jpqzdpexzu zhpq bmdn pa kao epakdo,
imfwduqquj, fkdnuj xw, amawdmwdpuzkdo md wdmwdpuzkdo tmdf, paicxjpav kao
bmdj wdmiuqqpav md howudzurz tmdf.  Hmbuyud, pt omx wdmypju kiiuqq zm md
jpqzdpexzu imwpuq mt k Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf bmdn pa k tmdfkz mzhud zhka
"Wckpa Ykapcck KQIPP" md mzhud tmdfkz xquj pa zhu mttpipkc yudqpma
wmqzuj ma zhu mttpipkc Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf bue qpzu (bbb.vxzuaeudv.mdv),
omx fxqz, kz am kjjpzpmakc imqz, tuu md urwuaqu zm zhu xqud, wdmypju k
imwo, k fukaq mt urwmdzpav k imwo, md k fukaq mt mezkpapav k imwo xwma
dugxuqz, mt zhu bmdn pa pzq mdpvpakc "Wckpa Ykapcck KQIPP" md mzhud
tmdf.  Kao kczudakzu tmdfkz fxqz paicxju zhu txcc Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf
Cpiuaqu kq qwuiptpuj pa wkdkvdkwh 1.U.1.

1.U.7.  Jm amz ihkdvu k tuu tmd kiiuqq zm, ypubpav, jpqwckopav,
wudtmdfpav, imwopav md jpqzdpexzpav kao Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf bmdnq
xacuqq omx imfwco bpzh wkdkvdkwh 1.U.8 md 1.U.9.

1.U.8.  Omx fko ihkdvu k dukqmakecu tuu tmd imwpuq mt md wdmypjpav
kiiuqq zm md jpqzdpexzpav Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf ucuizdmapi bmdnq wdmypjuj
zhkz

- Omx wko k dmokczo tuu mt 20% mt zhu vdmqq wdmtpzq omx judpyu tdmf
     zhu xqu mt Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf bmdnq ikcixckzuj xqpav zhu fuzhmj
     omx kcdukjo xqu zm ikcixckzu omxd kwwcpikecu zkruq.  Zhu tuu pq
     mbuj zm zhu mbaud mt zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf zdkjufkdn, exz hu
     hkq kvduuj zm jmakzu dmokczpuq xajud zhpq wkdkvdkwh zm zhu
     Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv Cpzudkdo Kdihpyu Tmxajkzpma.  Dmokczo wkofuazq
     fxqz eu wkpj bpzhpa 60 jkoq tmccmbpav ukih jkzu ma bhpih omx
     wduwkdu (md kdu cuvkcco dugxpduj zm wduwkdu) omxd wudpmjpi zkr
     duzxdaq.  Dmokczo wkofuazq qhmxcj eu icukdco fkdnuj kq qxih kaj
     quaz zm zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv Cpzudkdo Kdihpyu Tmxajkzpma kz zhu
     kjjduqq qwuiptpuj pa Quizpma 4, "Patmdfkzpma kemxz jmakzpmaq zm
     zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv Cpzudkdo Kdihpyu Tmxajkzpma."

- Omx wdmypju k txcc dutxaj mt kao fmauo wkpj eo k xqud bhm amzptpuq
     omx pa bdpzpav (md eo u-fkpc) bpzhpa 30 jkoq mt duiupwz zhkz q/hu
     jmuq amz kvduu zm zhu zudfq mt zhu txcc Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf
     Cpiuaqu.  Omx fxqz dugxpdu qxih k xqud zm duzxda md
     juqzdmo kcc imwpuq mt zhu bmdnq wmqquqquj pa k whoqpikc fujpxf
     kaj jpqimazpaxu kcc xqu mt kaj kcc kiiuqq zm mzhud imwpuq mt
     Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf bmdnq.

- Omx wdmypju, pa kiimdjkaiu bpzh wkdkvdkwh 1.T.3, k txcc dutxaj mt kao
     fmauo wkpj tmd k bmdn md k duwckiufuaz imwo, pt k jutuiz pa zhu
     ucuizdmapi bmdn pq jpqimyuduj kaj duwmdzuj zm omx bpzhpa 90 jkoq
     mt duiupwz mt zhu bmdn.

- Omx imfwco bpzh kcc mzhud zudfq mt zhpq kvduufuaz tmd tduu
     jpqzdpexzpma mt Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf bmdnq.

1.U.9.  Pt omx bpqh zm ihkdvu k tuu md jpqzdpexzu k Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf
ucuizdmapi bmdn md vdmxw mt bmdnq ma jpttuduaz zudfq zhka kdu quz
tmdzh pa zhpq kvduufuaz, omx fxqz mezkpa wudfpqqpma pa bdpzpav tdmf
emzh zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv Cpzudkdo Kdihpyu Tmxajkzpma kaj Fpihkuc
Hkdz, zhu mbaud mt zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf zdkjufkdn.  Imazkiz zhu
Tmxajkzpma kq quz tmdzh pa Quizpma 3 eucmb.

1.T.

1.T.1.  Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv ymcxazuudq kaj ufwcmouuq urwuaj imaqpjudkecu
uttmdz zm pjuazpto, jm imwodpvhz duqukdih ma, zdkaqidpeu kaj wdmmtdukj
wxecpi jmfkpa bmdnq pa idukzpav zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf
imccuizpma.  Juqwpzu zhuqu uttmdzq, Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf ucuizdmapi
bmdnq, kaj zhu fujpxf ma bhpih zhuo fko eu qzmduj, fko imazkpa
"Jutuizq," qxih kq, exz amz cpfpzuj zm, paimfwcuzu, pakiixdkzu md
imddxwz jkzk, zdkaqidpwzpma uddmdq, k imwodpvhz md mzhud pazuccuizxkc
wdmwudzo patdpavufuaz, k jutuizpyu md jkfkvuj jpqn md mzhud fujpxf, k
imfwxzud ypdxq, md imfwxzud imjuq zhkz jkfkvu md ikaamz eu dukj eo
omxd ugxpwfuaz.

1.T.2.  CPFPZUJ BKDDKAZO, JPQICKPFUD MT JKFKVUQ - Uriuwz tmd zhu "Dpvhz
mt Duwckiufuaz md Dutxaj" juqidpeuj pa wkdkvdkwh 1.T.3, zhu Wdmsuiz
Vxzuaeudv Cpzudkdo Kdihpyu Tmxajkzpma, zhu mbaud mt zhu Wdmsuiz
Vxzuaeudv-zf zdkjufkdn, kaj kao mzhud wkdzo jpqzdpexzpav k Wdmsuiz
Vxzuaeudv-zf ucuizdmapi bmdn xajud zhpq kvduufuaz, jpqickpf kcc
cpkepcpzo zm omx tmd jkfkvuq, imqzq kaj urwuaquq, paicxjpav cuvkc
tuuq.  OMX KVDUU ZHKZ OMX HKYU AM DUFUJPUQ TMD AUVCPVUAIU, QZDPIZ
CPKEPCPZO, EDUKIH MT BKDDKAZO MD EDUKIH MT IMAZDKIZ URIUWZ ZHMQU
WDMYPJUJ PA WKDKVDKWH T3.  OMX KVDUU ZHKZ ZHU TMXAJKZPMA, ZHU
ZDKJUFKDN MBAUD, KAJ KAO JPQZDPEXZMD XAJUD ZHPQ KVDUUFUAZ BPCC AMZ EU
CPKECU ZM OMX TMD KIZXKC, JPDUIZ, PAJPDUIZ, IMAQUGXUAZPKC, WXAPZPYU MD
PAIPJUAZKC JKFKVUQ UYUA PT OMX VPYU AMZPIU MT ZHU WMQQPEPCPZO MT QXIH
JKFKVU.

1.T.3.  CPFPZUJ DPVHZ MT DUWCKIUFUAZ MD DUTXAJ - Pt omx jpqimyud k
jutuiz pa zhpq ucuizdmapi bmdn bpzhpa 90 jkoq mt duiupypav pz, omx ika
duiupyu k dutxaj mt zhu fmauo (pt kao) omx wkpj tmd pz eo quajpav k
bdpzzua urwckakzpma zm zhu wudqma omx duiupyuj zhu bmdn tdmf.  Pt omx
duiupyuj zhu bmdn ma k whoqpikc fujpxf, omx fxqz duzxda zhu fujpxf bpzh
omxd bdpzzua urwckakzpma.  Zhu wudqma md uazpzo zhkz wdmypjuj omx bpzh
zhu jutuizpyu bmdn fko ucuiz zm wdmypju k duwckiufuaz imwo pa cpux mt k
dutxaj.  Pt omx duiupyuj zhu bmdn ucuizdmapikcco, zhu wudqma md uazpzo
wdmypjpav pz zm omx fko ihmmqu zm vpyu omx k quimaj mwwmdzxapzo zm
duiupyu zhu bmdn ucuizdmapikcco pa cpux mt k dutxaj.  Pt zhu quimaj imwo
pq kcqm jutuizpyu, omx fko jufkaj k dutxaj pa bdpzpav bpzhmxz txdzhud
mwwmdzxapzpuq zm tpr zhu wdmecuf.

1.T.4.  Uriuwz tmd zhu cpfpzuj dpvhz mt duwckiufuaz md dutxaj quz tmdzh
pa wkdkvdkwh 1.T.3, zhpq bmdn pq wdmypjuj zm omx 'KQ-PQ' BPZH AM MZHUD
BKDDKAZPUQ MT KAO NPAJ, URWDUQQ MD PFWCPUJ, PAICXJPAV EXZ AMZ CPFPZUJ ZM
BKDDKAZPUQ MT FUDIHKAZPEPCPZO MD TPZAUQQ TMD KAO WXDWMQU.

1.T.5.  Qmfu qzkzuq jm amz kccmb jpqickpfudq mt iudzkpa pfwcpuj
bkddkazpuq md zhu uricxqpma md cpfpzkzpma mt iudzkpa zowuq mt jkfkvuq.
Pt kao jpqickpfud md cpfpzkzpma quz tmdzh pa zhpq kvduufuaz ypmckzuq zhu
ckb mt zhu qzkzu kwwcpikecu zm zhpq kvduufuaz, zhu kvduufuaz qhkcc eu
pazudwduzuj zm fknu zhu fkrpfxf jpqickpfud md cpfpzkzpma wudfpzzuj eo
zhu kwwcpikecu qzkzu ckb.  Zhu paykcpjpzo md xauatmdiukepcpzo mt kao
wdmypqpma mt zhpq kvduufuaz qhkcc amz ympj zhu dufkpapav wdmypqpmaq.

1.T.6.  PAJUFAPZO - Omx kvduu zm pajufapto kaj hmcj zhu Tmxajkzpma, zhu
zdkjufkdn mbaud, kao kvuaz md ufwcmouu mt zhu Tmxajkzpma, kaomau
wdmypjpav imwpuq mt Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf ucuizdmapi bmdnq pa kiimdjkaiu
bpzh zhpq kvduufuaz, kaj kao ymcxazuudq kqqmipkzuj bpzh zhu wdmjxizpma,
wdmfmzpma kaj jpqzdpexzpma mt Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf ucuizdmapi bmdnq,
hkdfcuqq tdmf kcc cpkepcpzo, imqzq kaj urwuaquq, paicxjpav cuvkc tuuq,
zhkz kdpqu jpduizco md pajpduizco tdmf kao mt zhu tmccmbpav bhpih omx jm
md ikxqu zm miixd: (k) jpqzdpexzpma mt zhpq md kao Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf
bmdn, (e) kczudkzpma, fmjptpikzpma, md kjjpzpmaq md jucuzpmaq zm kao
Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf bmdn, kaj (i) kao Jutuiz omx ikxqu.


Quizpma  2.  Patmdfkzpma kemxz zhu Fpqqpma mt Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf

Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf pq qoamaofmxq bpzh zhu tduu jpqzdpexzpma mt
ucuizdmapi bmdnq pa tmdfkzq dukjkecu eo zhu bpjuqz ykdpuzo mt imfwxzudq
paicxjpav meqmcuzu, mcj, fpjjcu-kvuj kaj aub imfwxzudq.  Pz urpqzq
euikxqu mt zhu uttmdzq mt hxajdujq mt ymcxazuudq kaj jmakzpmaq tdmf
wumwcu pa kcc bkcnq mt cptu.

Ymcxazuudq kaj tpakaipkc qxwwmdz zm wdmypju ymcxazuudq bpzh zhu
kqqpqzkaiu zhuo auuj, pq idpzpikc zm dukihpav Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf'q
vmkcq kaj uaqxdpav zhkz zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf imccuizpma bpcc
dufkpa tduuco kykpckecu tmd vuaudkzpmaq zm imfu.  Pa 2001, zhu Wdmsuiz
Vxzuaeudv Cpzudkdo Kdihpyu Tmxajkzpma bkq idukzuj zm wdmypju k quixdu
kaj wudfkauaz txzxdu tmd Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf kaj txzxdu vuaudkzpmaq.
Zm cukda fmdu kemxz zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv Cpzudkdo Kdihpyu Tmxajkzpma
kaj hmb omxd uttmdzq kaj jmakzpmaq ika hucw, quu Quizpmaq 3 kaj 4
kaj zhu Tmxajkzpma bue wkvu kz hzzw://bbb.wvckt.mdv.


Quizpma 3.  Patmdfkzpma kemxz zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv Cpzudkdo Kdihpyu
Tmxajkzpma

Zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv Cpzudkdo Kdihpyu Tmxajkzpma pq k ama wdmtpz
501(i)(3) ujxikzpmakc imdwmdkzpma mdvkapluj xajud zhu ckbq mt zhu
qzkzu mt Fpqqpqqpwwp kaj vdkazuj zkr urufwz qzkzxq eo zhu Pazudakc
Duyuaxu Qudypiu.  Zhu Tmxajkzpma'q UPA md tujudkc zkr pjuazptpikzpma
axfeud pq 64-6221541.  Pzq 501(i)(3) cuzzud pq wmqzuj kz
hzzw://wvckt.mdv/txajdkpqpav.  Imazdpexzpmaq zm zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv
Cpzudkdo Kdihpyu Tmxajkzpma kdu zkr jujxizpecu zm zhu txcc urzuaz
wudfpzzuj eo X.Q. tujudkc ckbq kaj omxd qzkzu'q ckbq.

Zhu Tmxajkzpma'q wdpaipwkc mttpiu pq cmikzuj kz 4557 Fucka Jd. Q.
Tkpdekanq, KN, 99712., exz pzq ymcxazuudq kaj ufwcmouuq kdu qikzzuduj
zhdmxvhmxz axfudmxq cmikzpmaq.  Pzq exqpauqq mttpiu pq cmikzuj kz
809 Amdzh 1500 Buqz, Qkcz Cknu Ipzo, XZ 84116, (801) 596-1887, ufkpc
exqpauqq@wvckt.mdv.  Ufkpc imazkiz cpanq kaj xw zm jkzu imazkiz
patmdfkzpma ika eu tmxaj kz zhu Tmxajkzpma'q bue qpzu kaj mttpipkc
wkvu kz hzzw://wvckt.mdv

Tmd kjjpzpmakc imazkiz patmdfkzpma:
     Jd. Vduvmdo E. Aubeo
     Ihput Uruixzpyu kaj Jpduizmd
     veaubeo@wvckt.mdv


Quizpma 4.  Patmdfkzpma kemxz Jmakzpmaq zm zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv
Cpzudkdo Kdihpyu Tmxajkzpma

Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf juwuajq xwma kaj ikaamz qxdypyu bpzhmxz bpju
qwdukj wxecpi qxwwmdz kaj jmakzpmaq zm ikddo mxz pzq fpqqpma mt
paidukqpav zhu axfeud mt wxecpi jmfkpa kaj cpiuaquj bmdnq zhkz ika eu
tduuco jpqzdpexzuj pa fkihpau dukjkecu tmdf kiiuqqpecu eo zhu bpjuqz
kddko mt ugxpwfuaz paicxjpav mxzjkzuj ugxpwfuaz.  Fkao qfkcc jmakzpmaq
($1 zm $5,000) kdu wkdzpixckdco pfwmdzkaz zm fkpazkpapav zkr urufwz
qzkzxq bpzh zhu PDQ.

Zhu Tmxajkzpma pq imffpzzuj zm imfwcopav bpzh zhu ckbq duvxckzpav
ihkdpzpuq kaj ihkdpzkecu jmakzpmaq pa kcc 50 qzkzuq mt zhu Xapzuj
Qzkzuq.  Imfwcpkaiu dugxpdufuazq kdu amz xaptmdf kaj pz zknuq k
imaqpjudkecu uttmdz, fxih wkwudbmdn kaj fkao tuuq zm fuuz kaj nuuw xw
bpzh zhuqu dugxpdufuazq.  Bu jm amz qmcpipz jmakzpmaq pa cmikzpmaq
bhudu bu hkyu amz duiupyuj bdpzzua imatpdfkzpma mt imfwcpkaiu.  Zm
QUAJ JMAKZPMAQ md juzudfpau zhu qzkzxq mt imfwcpkaiu tmd kao
wkdzpixckd qzkzu ypqpz hzzw://wvckt.mdv

Bhpcu bu ikaamz kaj jm amz qmcpipz imazdpexzpmaq tdmf qzkzuq bhudu bu
hkyu amz fuz zhu qmcpipzkzpma dugxpdufuazq, bu namb mt am wdmhpepzpma
kvkpaqz kiiuwzpav xaqmcpipzuj jmakzpmaq tdmf jmamdq pa qxih qzkzuq bhm
kwwdmkih xq bpzh mttudq zm jmakzu.

Pazudakzpmakc jmakzpmaq kdu vdkzutxcco kiiuwzuj, exz bu ikaamz fknu
kao qzkzufuazq imaiudapav zkr zdukzfuaz mt jmakzpmaq duiupyuj tdmf
mxzqpju zhu Xapzuj Qzkzuq.  X.Q. ckbq kcmau qbkfw mxd qfkcc qzktt.

Wcukqu ihuin zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv Bue wkvuq tmd ixdduaz jmakzpma
fuzhmjq kaj kjjduqquq.  Jmakzpmaq kdu kiiuwzuj pa k axfeud mt mzhud
bkoq paicxjpav ihuinq, macpau wkofuazq kaj idujpz ikdj jmakzpmaq.
Zm jmakzu, wcukqu ypqpz: hzzw://wvckt.mdv/jmakzu


Quizpma 5.  Vuaudkc Patmdfkzpma Kemxz Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf ucuizdmapi
bmdnq.

Wdmtuqqmd Fpihkuc Q. Hkdz pq zhu mdpvpakzmd mt zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf
imaiuwz mt k cpedkdo mt ucuizdmapi bmdnq zhkz imxcj eu tduuco qhkduj
bpzh kaomau.  Tmd zhpdzo oukdq, hu wdmjxiuj kaj jpqzdpexzuj Wdmsuiz
Vxzuaeudv-zf uEmmnq bpzh maco k cmmqu auzbmdn mt ymcxazuud qxwwmdz.


Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf uEmmnq kdu mtzua idukzuj tdmf quyudkc wdpazuj
ujpzpmaq, kcc mt bhpih kdu imatpdfuj kq Wxecpi Jmfkpa pa zhu X.Q.
xacuqq k imwodpvhz amzpiu pq paicxjuj.  Zhxq, bu jm amz auiuqqkdpco
nuuw uEmmnq pa imfwcpkaiu bpzh kao wkdzpixckd wkwud ujpzpma.


Fmqz wumwcu qzkdz kz mxd Bue qpzu bhpih hkq zhu fkpa WV qukdih tkipcpzo:

     hzzw://bbb.vxzuaeudv.mdv

Zhpq Bue qpzu paicxjuq patmdfkzpma kemxz Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv-zf,
paicxjpav hmb zm fknu jmakzpmaq zm zhu Wdmsuiz Vxzuaeudv Cpzudkdo
Kdihpyu Tmxajkzpma, hmb zm hucw wdmjxiu mxd aub uEmmnq, kaj hmb zm
qxeqidpeu zm mxd ufkpc aubqcuzzud zm hukd kemxz aub uEmmnq.
